===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
1
In-service corrosion and grain boundary oxidation in neutron-irradiated 316 stainless steel 
baffle-former bolts
Timothy G. Lach1*, Maxim N. Gussev2, and Xiang (Frank) Chen1
1Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 1 Bethel Valley 
Road, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
2Nuclear Energy and Fuel Cycle Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 1 Bethel Valley Road, 
Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
* Corresponding author: lachtg@ornl.gov 
ABSTRACT
Reactor core internal components such as baffle-former bolts (BFBs) are subjected to significant 
mechanical stress, corrosive environment, and neutron irradiation from the reactor core during the 
plant operation. Over the long operation period, these conditions lead to potential degradation and 
of the bolts. In this work, characterization was performed on the oxidized surface of stainless steel 
BFBs harvested from a commercial pressurized water reactor (PWR) after 40 years of operation. 
The analysis shows that a complex multilayered surface oxide with six identified layers formed 
that is different from 2-layer structure commonly observed in model experiments. The oxide varies 
by composition – predominantly Fe, Cr, and Ni, grain size, and phase, and has features resembling 
both unirradiated and radiation/ corrosion experiments likely due to the low radiation flux 
compared to ion-irradiation or the test reactor radiation. In addition, grain boundary oxidative 
attack featured a pathway for Fe and other elements to move from the metal matrix to the outermost 
oxide. The results help assess PWR lifetime extension, put into context previous experimental 
studies, and provide input for designing experiments combining radiation and corrosion effects.
Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-
00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the 
publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 
reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States 
Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 
federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan 
(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan). 
Keywords: Baffle-former bolt; In-service irradiation and corrosion; Multilayered oxide structure; 
Radiation-induced segregation (RIS); Irradiation assisted stress corrosion cracking (IASCC); 
Crack initiation 
1. Introduction
Light water reactor (LWR) internal components are exposed to multiple extreme environmental 
conditions such as high temperature water, neutron and gamma radiation, and mechanical stresses. 
These conditions leave the materials susceptible to microstructural changes that increase the 
susceptibility to void swelling, embrittlement, and irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking 
(IASCC). In particular, IASCC is of high concern for life extension of pressurized water reactors 

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
2
(PWRs) [1-3]. To understand IASCC, the effects of irradiation on both general corrosion and 
localized grain boundary oxidation must be studied. 
Most experimental research into IASCC and irradiation/corrosion has focused on sequential 
exposure of irradiated steel to corrosive environments such as simulated PWR water [4-10] or 
relatively short-term combined ion (usually proton) irradiation-corrosion experiments [11-13]. 
Being valuable from scientific and engineering points of view, out-of-reactor short-term 
experiments cannot fully reproduce in-service conditions. Duration of the corrosion processes is 
an important parameter; irradiation accelerates corrosion at relatively short time scales, but 
potentially reduces corrosion rates at longer time scales due to the evolution of the Cr content in 
the inner oxide layer [7, 8]. Also, model experiments often do not include the effect of water 
radiolysis observed during concurrent irradiation/corrosion experiments [11-14]. Radiolysis has 
been found to increase the corrosion potential of the water, thus dissolving the inner Cr-rich oxide 
and reducing its passivating ability but still reducing the overall corrosion rate compared to 
sequential exposure [8]. Additionally, parameters like flux (damage rate), neutron spectra, 
exposure time are difficult to reproduce. It underlines the importance of studying harvested in-
service components, which have experienced LWR conditions with concurrent irradiation, 
corrosion, and mechanical stresses. 
As one of the PWR internal components, baffle-former bolts (BFBs) are particularly susceptible 
to IASCC attack. Over the long operation period, the extreme conditions in operating reactors can 
lead to effects like embrittlement, creep, stress relaxation followed by occasional overstressing, 
and large-scale cracking. The first degraded BFBs were observed in 1989 [15]. In support of 
evaluating long-term operation performance of materials used in core internal components, the 
Materials Research Pathway under the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Nuclear 
Energy, Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program pursued the retrieval of aged structural 
components such as BFBs for the study of the microstructure, mechanical, and corrosion-related 
properties. Two high fluence BFBs were removed in 2011 from a Westinghouse two-loop 
downflow type PWR and delivered to Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The BFBs showed no 
indication of cracking by visual and ultrasonic inspection after being withdrawn from service. In 
addition to standard post irradiation examination (PIE) to analyze radiation-induced 
microstructural and mechanical property evolution along the length of the bolts found in previous 
work [16] and ongoing work, the oxidized surfaces of the BFBs are also the subject of high interest. 
This study focuses on the curved region of bolt head/shank intersection. This intersection still has 
the in-service exposure surface intact from handling, which is of high interest because it has a high 
mechanical stress concentration compared to the rest of the bolt head or shank and was also 
exposed to the primary water [3]. Thus, this region has the three primary components for IASCC: 
corrosive environment, stress, and irradiation. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first time the 
native oxide of in-service BFBs has been characterized with high resolution analytical electron 
microscopy. Characterization of the oxidized surface and oxidized grain boundary will be 
discussed in detail. The results show that while simulated conditions in sequential experiments or 
concurrent ion irradiation/corrosion experiments do provide useful information about the corrosion 
and grain boundary oxidation behavior in stainless steels, the oxidation behavior observed in 
materials after PWR in-service exposure is more complex.

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
3
2. Materials and Methods
Two BFBs studied in the present work were removed from a Westighouse two-loop downflow 
type pressurized water reactor (PWR) in 2011. During routine inspection, the BFBs showed no 
visual indication of cracking, though a lower torque was needed for removal from the baffle 
structure than the original torque specified during installation, suggesting radiation-induced stress 
relaxation [17]. Importantly, the bolts do still have some of the original surface that was exposed 
to coolant water where the bolt head intersects with the bolt shank. Optical and microscopy survey 
showed that this area did not receive significant mechanical damage during removal and handling 
being protected, at some degee, by the bolt geometry. 
The element composition of bolts are within the specifications for type 316-SS based on atom 
probe tomography analysis conducted previously [16]. The bolts were in the reactor for 
approximately 40 years; the calculated radiation dose of each bolt was different as the bolt head in 
#4412 received ~41 displacements per atom (dpa) while #4416 received ~29 dpa due to the 
difference in neutron flux at each bolt location. The exact temperature profiles of the bolts are 
unknown, but it is known that the power plant went through 35 operating cycles for fuel 
replacement and maintenance [18], so the temperature did ramp up and down. The operating 
temperature at this portion of the bolts was likely about 305-317 °C based on finite element 
modeling [3]. After removal from service, the bolts were cut inside a hot cell, and the bolt heads 
were sliced further to produce samples suitable for out-of-hot-cell handling, Figure 1.
Figure 1. a) Harvested baffle bolt; b, c) Cutting and slicing the BFB head; d) Location of the 
studied specimen. 


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
4
A slice of the bolt head sections for both bolts was polished to a mirror-finish with a final polishing 
step using colloidal silica in a vibratory polisher. The cross-section of the near-surface area in the 
bolt head/shank intersection curved region was characterized by SEM-electron backscatter 
diffraction (EBSD) using a Tescan Mira3 SEM equipped with an Oxford Instruments Symmetry 
S2 high speed EBSD detector. SEM voltage was 20 kV; scanning was performed on a rectangular 
grid with step size 500 nm (for general view scan) and 125 nm (for high-resolution scans). 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) liftouts normal to the surface for further analysis were 
carried out using a Thermo Fisher Versa3D dual-beam focused ion-beam (FIB)/SEM. The TEM 
sample preparation followed the procedures of initial trenching, cutting, and thinning to 200 nm 
with 30 keV Ga ion beam, rough polishing to 100 nm with ion beam energy gradually reduced 
from 16 keV to 8 and 5 keV, and fine polishing with 2 keV ion beam to remove most FIB-induced 
damage. Before loading into the TEM, samples were always cleaned with a Fischione 1020 
Nanomill for 10 minutes on each side using 900 eV Ar + ions. Microstructural and elemental 
mapping characterization was performed using transmission Kikuchi diffraction (tKD) using the 
Tescan Mira3 SEM and scanning TEM (STEM)/Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)-
based mapping using a Thermo Fisher Talos F200X STEM equipped with the SuperX 4-sector X-
ray EDS system. This was done to identify and quantify structural defects, elemental segregation, 
and nanoscale precipitates. The SEM-EDS, EBSD, and tKD analysis and mapping were performed 
using the Oxford Instruments Aztec Crystal and EDAX OIM v.8 software packages. The TEM 
and STEM-EDS analysis was performed using Thermo Fisher Velox software. 
3. Results
3.1.  General Baffle Former Bolt microstructure 


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
5
Figure 2. General microstructure of the BFB #4412 head portion. a, b) EBSD inverse pole figure 
(IPF) and KAM maps, respectively taken at the distance of approximately 2 mm from the head-to-
shaft-transition (the area is marked as “Bulk” in Figure 1); c) SEM BSE image taken close to the 
shaft and illustrating grain morphology and presence of non-metallic inclusions (black arrows). 
d, e) EBSD maps recorded close to the shaft ((the area is marked as “Head-to-shank transition” 
in Figure 1). The IPFs are colored in the horizontal direction. EBSD step size: 500 nm. 
Figure 2(a-c) shows a representative BFB head microstructure recorded in the head area 
(approximately 2 mm from the head-to-shaft transition). Equiaxial well-shaped grains dominate 
the microstructure; many grains reveal annealing twins. No retained ferrite was observed in the 
microstructure, so no phase map is shown. The SEM BSE image, Figure 2(c), shows the presence 
of nonmetallic inclusions of a few micrometers in size. 
Although EBSD data suggest a mostly annealed microstructure with minor misorientation 
gradients, some grains contain slightly elevated misorientation levels with multiple in-grain low-
angle boundaries, see the kernel average misorientation (KAM) map, Figure 2(a, b). Several of 
such grains are marked as “AG” (“abnormal grains”). A population of much smaller recrystallized 
grains fully surrounds AGs, ruling out the possibility that cold work (occasional or intentional 
deformation) was a possible source of the elevated in-grain misorientation levels. KAM 
distribution inside such abnormal grains is also not typical for cold or warm deformation in 
reference (non-irradiated) steel or strain localization processes in irradiated steel. The specific 
shape of grain boundaries (arcs or semicircles) for AGs suggests that these grains may be a result 
of abnormal grain growth [19] (sometimes termed also as “anomalous grain growth”). 
Figure 2(d, e) shows the microstructure of the head-to-shank transition area. One may see the same 
pattern of dominating well-shaped equiaxed grains mixed with relatively rare AGs. Also, there is 
a thin layer (shown by dotted rectangle in Figure 2(e) along the edge with a thickness estimated at 
10–15 µm with elevated KAM values. Elevated local misorientation means high local dislocation 
density along the edge. The impact on general corrosion of a deformed surface layer could be an 
enhancement of uniform oxidation [20-22]; however, this prior work showed an ultrafine grain 
(UFG) microstructure at the surface, which appears to be absent here, although it cannot be entirely 
ruled out since the initial surface condition of the bolts is unknown. As will be shown in Section 
3.3, the nanograin oxide layer, if from a consumed UFG surface, is much thinner than what would 
be found from machining [22].  The impact on IASCC may be significant due to the importance 
of strain localization on IASCC [1] and will be discussed in more details in Sections 3.4 and 4.2. 
Prior research has shown that a highly deformed and/or UFG surface may have enhanced SCC 
resistance in unirradiated environments [20, 21]. This thin layer is likely related to BFB 
manufacturing. 
Not shown here but presented elsewhere [16, 23] is the radiation-induced defect structures. There 
is a high density of nanocavities with limited swelling, dislocation loops, and Ni/Si-rich 
precipitates within the grains and radiation-induced segregation (RIS) to grain boundaries. These 
structures have a substantive impact on radiation hardening and IASCC susceptibility. A detailed 
analysis of as-irradiated microstructure and post-service mechanical performace will be given in a 
separate focused paper.
3.2.  Appearance of the water-exposed surface
As was mentioned above, the slices still had the water exposed surface retained, Figure 3. The 
oxidized surface is heterogeneous in nature with large lighter shade features down to smaller 
nodules. The range in size of the nodule-like features is large with some greater than 10 μm across 

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
6
and others less than 1 μm. The surface microstructure may be interpreted as an oxide film with 
coarse particles of iron-rich oxide. Such a structure is common and was often observed in corrosion 
and stress corrosion cracking experiments [24-26].
In this region of the bolts (head-to-shank transition area), there are also cracks in the oxide layer, 
visible in SEM, while there are no cracks visible away from the curved region of the bolt. Some 
of the cracks appear to be over 20 μm in length. Most cracks are oriented in the BFB axial direction, 
likely reflecting the direction of acting stress. 
Figure 3: Backscatter electron SEM images from two different areas of the surface of the 
head/shank transition area of BFB #4412. There are multiple small cracks visible (red arrows) 
and rough heterogeneously sized Fe-rich oxide particles across surface. 
3.3.  Complexity of the surface oxide multilayer structure
To investigate further the oxidation behavior and grain boundary attack at the cracks, targeted FIB 
liftouts were taken from the oxidized surface targeting cracks. One such liftout is shown in Figure 
4 for BFB #4412, highlighting specific features: complex surface oxidation, grain boundary 
oxidative attack and cracking, and localized deformation in the form of dislocation channels [23]. 


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
7
Figure 4: a) STEM-ADF image of liftout from BFB #4412 taken from oxidized surface near “crack 
#4” in Figure 9. b) tKD IPF map of the same liftout. Multiple features are apparent including a 
multilayered oxide (red arrows), grain boundary attack (blue arrow), and localized deformation 
features inside the bolt (yellow arrows). The IPF map is based on the face centered cubic (FCC) 
lattice showing the matrix austenite and oxide layers have same lattice.
The surface oxide on the curved region of the BFBs is complex. The STEM images, tKD IPF map, 
and EDS map for BFB #4412 in Figure 5, the TEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) 
patterns for BFB #4412 in Figure 6, STEM-EDS analysis for BFB #4412 in Figure 7, and STEM-
EDS analysis for BFB #4416 in Figure 8 highlight six distinct layers of the surface oxide that 
separate themselves by composition and by grain size. The observed porosity within the oxide 
layers of the liftouts is minimal. Interestingly, instead of six layers, only three layers are commonly 
identified for corrosion and radiation-enhanced corrosion [7, 13]. The total oxide thickness for this 
BFB is ~3 μm near its thinnest point and up to ~5 μm near grain boundaries.
The outermost oxide layer, denoted as layer 1, is an Fe-rich oxide with large grains ~250-500 nm 
in size. The thickness of this layer varies from one grain thick (~250 nm) to multiple grains but 
seems to be largest around grain boundaries. The second layer is an intermixed Fe/Ni-rich and Cr-
rich oxide with grain sizes of ~100-200 nm and a thickness of approximately 600-700 nm. The 
grains appear to be Fe/Ni-rich while the oxide boundaries are Cr-rich. The third layer is similar in 
composition to layer 2 but is marked by a much finer grain size of well under 100 nm (~50 nm). 
The interesting segregation behavior of what appears as Fe/Ni-rich grain centers surrounded by Cr 
is more obvious in layer 2 but also appears be the case in the smaller grains in layer 3. The variation 
in composition from oxide grain to oxide grain can clearly be seen in Figure 7(f). For this BFB 
#4412, layer 3 is ~1.3 μm thick, but as is shown in Figure 8, the layer 3 oxide thickness can vary 
substantially from bolt to bolt with only ~150-400 nm for the sample taken from BFB #4416. 
While layer 1 may traditionally be referred to as the outer oxide, layers 1, 2, and 3 here are all 
outside the original metal surface and so could be considered outer oxide layers. This is based on 
the grain size being much less than the inner oxide layers 4 and 5 as well as a growing mismatch 
in the zone axis orientation of the base metal and inner oxide layers 4 and 5 in Figure 6.


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
8
The fourth and fifth oxide layers appear monolithic in nature but are segregated by composition 
with the fourth layer being Cr/Fe/Ni-rich while the fifth layer closest to the alloy surface is depleted 
in Fe and Ni. The “monolithic” nature is a result of these layers being originally the base metal 
substrate and thus part of the original large micron-scale grains. This is clear based on two 
observations: the tKD-IPF map in Figure 4 shows that layer 4 has the same orientation as the base 
metal below (layer 5 could not be indexed) just as was observed previously in high temperature 
oxidation of a Fe-19Cr-9Ni alloy [27], and the TEM BF image and selected area electron 
diffraction (SAED) patterns in Figure 6 showing the layer 4 contrast matches that of the base metal 
below when tilted to a [100] zone axis and the diffraction pattern matching orientation between 
the metal and oxide layers of 4 and 5, though all three – base metal and oxide layers 4/5 – have 
different crystal structures. Looking at the SAED patterns, layer 5 looks to have two sets of 
diffraction spots – ones that match the base metal (possibly due to an overlap of the selected area 
aperture with the base metal) and ones that have a similar but slightly smaller spacing with 
diffraction spots inside the base metal diffraction spots, consistent with a rock salt structure with 
a cube-on-cube orientation relationship with the base metal [7]; layer 4 has the same single 
crystalline pattern but with added superlattice reflections consistent with a spinel structure. The 
original metal surface is at the boundary between the nanocrystalline layer 3 and layer 4.
The final layer (layer 6) is a thin sub-5 nm Ni-enriched layer at the matrix/oxide interface. This 
Ni-enriched layer has been observed in experimental conditions in both sequential and concurrent 
testing [6, 28]. However, interestingly, this Ni-layer is not observed on the right side of the grain 
boundary attack, as shown in the linear concentration profiles in Figure 7. This may be due to the 
behavior of the grain boundary itself, as it breaks up the layers nearest the matrix or the Ni 
segregation to the grain boundary discourages the formation of the thin Ni-enriched layer. This 
layer could not be identified in the tKD maps in Figure 5 or the TEM imaging and SAED 
diffraction in Figure 6, meaning it is purely an elemental segregation of Ni to the metal/oxide 
interface.
The composition gradient of each layer, 1 through 5, are shown in 1-D composition profiles in 
Figure 7(c, d). The thickness of layers 4 and 5 are ~300 nm, which are about the same as in BFB 
#4416 in Figure 8. The total thickness of the surface oxide in BFB #4416 in Figure 8 is ~1.7-2 μm, 
or about two-thirds of the oxide thickness for BFB #4412. This could be due to multiple reasons, 
such as: (1) the thickness of the oxide likely can vary between bolts; (2) the radiation dose is 
different and could affect oxide formation; and (3) the PWR water conditions and flow could be 
slightly different.

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
9
 
Figure 5: Complexity of the BFB in-service oxidation processes. a) STEM-BF, b) STEM-LAADF, 
c) STEM-HAADF with tKD-IPF map overlayed, and d) STEM-EDS Cr/Fe/Ni map of BFB #4412 
highlighting the multilayered oxide and grain boundary attack. Numbers correspond with each 
oxide layer based on grain size and composition. The two near-parallel dotted lines highlight the 
grain boundary pathway for the outward diffusion of Fe/Ni. Note: the fit of the tKD-IPF map 
overlayed in (c) is not perfect as there may have been some drift during the tKD scan compared 
to the STEM imaging.


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
10
Figure 6: TEM BF image and SAED patterns of surface oxide tilted to [100] zone axis of a grain 
in the base metal just below the oxide in BFB #4412. Contrast in the BF image and the SAED 
patterns from layers 4 and 5 highlight that these layers were a part of the original metal, and the 
original metal surface is between layers 3 and 4.


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
11
Figure 7: Element distribution profiles though the oxide layers in BFB #4412. a) STEM-BF 
image and b) STEM-EDS map of Cr/Fe/Ni overlayed showing oxide and grain boundary attack. 
(c-f) Concentration profiles corresponding to arrows in (b). Profiles normal to the surface (c and 
d) delineate the boundaries of each layer. 


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
12
Figure 8: Grain boundary attack and crack initiation in lower dose BFB #4416. a) STEM-BF 
images near an oxidized grain boundary in BFB #4416 highlighting the multilayered oxide and 
grain boundary attack. Numbers correspond with each oxide layer based on grain size and 
composition. b) STEM-BF and c) STEM-HAADF images showing oxide and grain boundary 
attack. STEM-EDS maps of d) Cr, Fe, Ni overlapped, e) Ni, f) Si, and g) O showing segregation 
of Ni at grain boundary but a depletion of Si near the oxidized grain boundary.
3.4.  Specific microstructure features near the surface and in the oxide layer
3.4.1. Grain boundary corrosion.
Figure 5 and Figure 7 highlight the interesting oxidative grain boundary attack. The near-parallel 
dotted lines in Figure 5 highlight two features: the grain boundary oxide is enriched in Fe and 
partially Ni or conversely depleted in Cr, and the oxide grain size is much larger than the oxides 
in layers 3, 4, and 5 away from the grain boundary. The grain boundary acts as a fast diffusion 
pathway or pipeline for Fe and Ni to move to the outer oxides, especially layer 1 which is thickest 
around the grain boundary. The larger grains in layers 1 and 2 along the ‘pipeline’ are all enriched 
in Fe and Ni as highlighted in the concentration profiles in Figure 7(e, f). This is likely exacerbated 
by radiation-induced segregation of Ni and Si to the grain boundary and depletion of Cr at the 
grain boundary. This same behavior observed in BFB #4412 can also be seen in BFB #4416 as 
layer 3 is clearly interrupted by larger grains near the grain boundary in Figure 8 and the original 
grain boundary location within the oxide is enriched in Fe and Ni and depleted in Cr. Radiation-
induced segregation not only enhances grain boundary attack, but it also enhances external oxide 
growth. Outside of this ‘pipeline’, oxidation forms a wide wedge shape into the grain boundary. 
The wedge-shape may form as a means to further propagate the grain boundary oxidation, or 
possibly due to the grain boundary oxidation being hindered, such as by a sulfide particle like the 
Cu-rich sulfide particle in Figure 5.


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
13
3.4.2. Initial stages of stress corrosion cracking. 
SEM imaging, as shown in BFB #4412 in Figure 9(a), demonstrated multiple small cracks along 
the specimen edge; all observed cracks were located within the curved area, where stress 
concentration would happen. The longest crack reached ~6 µm. All analyzed cracks appeared to 
be filled with oxides. Some but not all cracks originated from oxide pockets where there was wide 
wedge-shaped oxidation visible. SEM/EBSD crystallography analysis results for one of the cracks 
are shown in Figure 9(b, c). One may see the crack propagated along random high-angle grain 
boundary (RHAB). Special ∑3 boundaries were immune to crack formation in all analyzed cases, 
which would correlate with the lack of Ni/Si RIS and Cr depletion at coherent ∑3 grain and twin 
boundaries [29]. 
Figure 9: a) SEM images from the curved section of BFB #4412 where the bolt head meets the 
bolt shank. Microscale cracks indicative of IASCC are found in the curved region and not in the 


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
14
straight regions. b, c) IPF and KAM analysis of in-service formed short crack highlighted by red 
dotted box in a). AG: abnormal grain; DC: defect-free channel. EBSD step size: 125 nm.
One specific aspect is important to mention related to IASCC. Multiple defect-free channels were 
observed in the near-surface grains – see  Figure 9(c) and Figure 5(a) – suggesting at least one 
significant loading event while in service. Channel formation was observed at stress levels likely 
ranging from 45% to 60–80% of the irradiated yield stress with high stress experienced locally at 
the channel [1, 30, 31]. The channel density, characterized by the fraction of grains containing 
defect-free channels and the number of channels per grain, strongly depends on the strain rate or 
loading rate, temperature, alloy composition, and microstructure. Currently, it is not possible to 
precisely determine the stress level experienced by the examined baffle former bolt while in 
service. However, the presence of channels in the majority of analyzed near-surface grains implies 
that the stress levels approached values comparable to the yield stress of the irradiated material.
Formation of defect-free channels in the investigated baffle former bolts and their complex 
microstructure are addressed in our separate, focused paper [23]. In the context of the present work, 
loading event may explain appearance of cracks in the oxide film, Figure 3, and, if stress acted for 
reasonably long time, formation of short stress corrosion cracks, Figure 9(a). These cracks were 
not observed in regions of the bolt surface away from the curved region where stress would be 
highest.
 
4. Discussion
4.1.  General oxidation in commercial PWR environment – comparison with 
experiments
Surface corrosion of stainless steels in PWR water conditions at around 300 °C, whether with or 
without radiation, typically is presented as two oxide layers with a Cr-rich inner oxide and an Fe-
rich outer oxide [4, 7, 32, 33]. The fully dense, multilayered oxide found at the surface of the 
harvested BFBs in this study have a similar generalized inner and outer oxides; however, both the 
inner and outer oxides can be divided into multiple layers themselves. The inner oxide, noted as 
layers 4 and 5 in Figure 5, are split between a Cr-(Fe,Ni)-oxide with a spinel structure and a Cr-
oxide with a rock salt structure nearest the current metal surface. The Cr-(Fe, Ni)-oxide layer 4 
seems to function as a compositional intermediary between the outer oxide layers, which have a 
higher concentration of Fe, and the innermost oxide layer 5. As illustrated in Figure 7, layer 5 
consists primarily of Cr oxide. In contrast, layers 2 and 3 contain roughly equal amounts of Cr and 
Fe, while layer 4 contains more Fe than layer 5, but less than what is found in layers 2 and 3. 
Rather than just a composition gradient, it is clear the inner oxide is phase separated from the outer 
oxide. 
The outer oxide, on the other hand, has three layers that all have a polycrystalline spinel structure 
but vary by composition and grain size. Layers 2 and 3 have similar composition and composition 
distribution in and around the grains but vary strongly by grain size. Layer 3, which formed on the 
original metal surface, was dominated by oxide grain nucleation rather than grain growth, while 
layer 2 with the larger grains was dominated by grain growth. It is clearer in the larger grains in 
layer 2, but in both layers, the grain interiors are Fe and Ni-rich while the grain boundaries are Cr-
rich. This elemental separation may limit grain growth in layers 2 and especially 3, and it could be 
a result of radiation-enhanced diffusion within the oxide possibly due to a vacancy-segregant 
interaction [34, 35]. The most outward layer, layer 1, is relatively thin throughout – one grain thick 
– but also is comprised of the large nodules shown in Figure 3. As will be discussed in the next 

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
15
section, these nodules likely form more readily and are larger over grain boundaries. By analogy 
with ref. [36], the layers may have different strength, Young modulus, and hardness, but this aspect 
is out of the present work scope. 
The initial oxidation likely began at the interface between layers 3 and 4. Cr, followed by Fe and 
Ni, move to the metal surface and then moves outward forming an oxide as O moves inward into 
the metal. Outward Cr diffusion may have been enhanced by both irradiation and by the presence 
of network dislocations formed during manufacturing [22]. This likely appears to take place 
rapidly initially based on the nanocrystalline nature of layer 3. However, perhaps as a result of the 
Cr segregation to the oxide grain boundaries ( Figure 7), there may be limited continued grain 
growth, with more grain growth on the outer layers 1 and 2 where the Cr content is less. Layer 1 
in particular is where the Cr reached its limit. On the inner oxide, layer 5 perhaps formed separate 
from layer 4 as Fe and Ni moved to the outer oxides, depleting layer 5 of Fe and Ni leaving behind 
a Cr-enriched and protective inner oxide layer, perhaps also enhanced by irradiation [8]. 
Previous studies have shown that the effects of irradiation on corrosion of austenitic stainless steels 
depend on whether irradiation and corrosion processes occur concurrently [12] or sequentially [4], 
and whether the irradiation induces radiolysis within the water [33]. In sequential irradiation 
followed by corrosion experiments, the degree of corrosion was suppressed in the irradiated 
material due to radiation enhanced diffusion (RED) of Cr to the surface and forming a more 
protective inner oxide [7]. The irradiated material also has a thin rock salt structure form at the 
metal/oxide interface.
In concurrent radiation/corrosion with ion irradiation in PWR water, radiolysis increases the 
activity of oxygen which enhances oxide formation while destabilizing the inner oxide porosity 
[33]; with the lack of porosity, the oxidation rate is reduced as it correlates with porosity or excess 
volume [32]. However, the inner oxide film dissolves readily when in contact with water under 
radiolysis; so the corrosion rate reaches a steady state when the oxide growth rate equals the 
dissolution rate on rate [33]. Interestingly, they also found that radiation damage within the steel 
(not in the oxide) had minimal impact on corrosion in PWR water. However, proton damage rates 
and radiolysis rates are on the order of 100-150 times higher than in a LWR environment [33]. 
Comparatively, the morphology, phases, and compositional distribution of the oxide layers in the 
harvested BFBs appear to borrow features of both irradiated and unirradiated materials from these 
prior studies into irradiation-affected corrosion. Layer 5, noted from Figure 5 and Figure 6, has the 
rock salt structure, which was observed in proton irradiated material that was subsequentally 
exposed to PWR-type water [7]. However, the overall oxide thickness and the morphology of the 
interface between the inner oxide and the metal resemble that of the unirradiated and corroded 
material [7], as unirradiated material had a thicker oxide and a curvy/ non-flat interface with the 
metal, and the inner oxide (layers 4-6) match the orientation of the underlying metal grains as 
shown in Figure 4 similarly to that of oxidation of polished surfaces [27]. The surface oxide is also 
fully dense, which is the opposite of the unirradiated material and more in line with irradiated and 
corroded material, but the fully dense nature could also be related to deformed surface observed 
in Figure 2(e) which may promote Cr diffusion to the surface [22]; though it is unknown how the 
porosity may have changed over time, but it could be speculated that the porosity closes over the 
long term of operation and thus the corrosion rate is reduced over time. This may correspond to 
the lower degree of radiolysis in the PWR environment. The radiolysis in the PWR may have been 
enough to increase the oxygen activity, and thus, fully densify the inner oxide and reduce the 
oxidation rate, but the degree of radiolysis may have been low enough to limit dissolution of the 
inner oxide. As a result, the overall corrosion rate goes down over time.

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
16
The combined nature of features from both irradiated and unirradiated stainless steel corrosion 
highlights that corrosion kinetics depend strongly on radiation flux and length of time under 
exposure. The mechanism for irradiation affected corrosion likely changes over time, with more 
dependence on radiolysis of the water, or relative lack thereof, initially and more dependence on 
radiation damage and RED over extended time as the oxide thickens and porosity closes. This 
balance in radiolysis versus RED may also account for the differences in oxide thickness and 
individual oxide layer thickness, particularly the nanocrystalline layer 3. BFB #4412 had a higher 
neutron fluence than BFB #4416 despite being in the reactor the same amount of time; the higher 
radiation damage or local radiolysis levels in BFB #4412 may have enhanced oxide grain 
nucleation before being taken over by grain growth in layer 2. Oxide grain growth may have taken 
place earlier in BFB #4416. This is consistent with recent research that shows susceptibility to 
IASCC (and thus relatedly oxidation) can vary by a factor of 2 or more depending on location of 
the bolts along the former plate, even when they are relatively close to each other [37]. 
Unfortunately, this is speculation as the ratio of layer 3 thickness between the two bolts is greater 
than the ratio of the neutron fluence in the two bolts, and there are potentially other effects that 
took place over the 40 years for the two bolts were in service. These other unknown effects could 
include variation in water flow near each bolt, variation in surface finish between the bolts, and 
potential spallation of the oxide into the water during operation.
4.2.  Radiation-enhanced grain boundary attack and IASCC in commercial PWR 
environment
In addition to the general surface corrosion, there was substantial grain boundary attack. While 
general corrosion in PWR internals is less of a concern, grain boundary attack is a significant 
concern due to the susceptibility and effect it has on IASCC. Most studies attribute radiation 
induced segregation (RIS) as one of the primary reasons responsible for grain boundaries 
becoming more suscetible to oxidation under irradiation. This certainly appears to be the case here. 
The original grain boundary within the oxide is greatly depleted in Cr along with depletion in Si 
relative to the surrounding oxide and even the base metal, as shown in Figure 7(e). Cr is depleted, 
while Ni is enriched at the grain boundary. This makes the grain boundary more susceptible to 
oxidation due to the lack of Cr, and the Si is oxidized and quickly dissolved into the PWR water 
[1, 38] and thus depleted at the grain boundary within the oxide. The grain boundary ahead of the 
oxide in BFB #4416 in Figure 8 is actually depleted of Si, likely due to the same dissolution process 
into the oxide or water. The behavior of the oxidized grain boundary in the metal does not appear 
to be different between the harvested BFBs and prior experimental conditions, as all the key 
components of IASCC are present.
What appears to be new is how oxidation of the grain boundary affects oxidation at the surface of 
the material: the grain boundary changes the local elemental distribution within the inner oxide 
layers and also removes the presence of the nanocrystalline layer 3 in the vicinity of the grain 
boundary. The lack of Cr allows for the enhanced outward diffusion of primarily Fe to the outer 
oxide enabling the growth of the large Fe-rich oxide nodules on the surface that appear primarily 
over grain boundaries. The lack of Cr likely enables grain growth within the grain boundary oxide 
because it is segregated to the oxide grain boundaries; Cr appears to suppress grain growth. So not 
only does RIS of Ni and Si and depletion of Cr enhance susceptibility of the steel to IASCC, it 
also appears to enhance general surface corrosion.
An alternative possibility is that a grain boundary crack occurred as a result of IASCC and grew 
into the metal a few microns but stopped. Then the open crack surface went through general 
corrosion but on a smaller length scale closing the crack. The region along the grain boundary then 

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
17
could essentially be the outermost oxide layer (layers 1 and 2 from Figure 5). So, instead of being 
a pathway to the outermost oxide, this effect could be two sets of oxides impinging on each other. 
However, this makes it difficult to explain the presence of the large, outermost Fe-rich nodules 
that commonly decorate the grain boundary regions. 
5. Conclusions
Detailed electron microscopy characterization of the corroded surface of harvested stainless steel 
316 baffle-former bolts from a commercial PWR was performed. The results showed a complex 
multilayered surface oxide that is in many ways different than the oxide observed in irradiated 
stainless steel subsequently put into simulated PWR conditions or that formed during combined 
ion irradiation and corrosion experiments. The results help validate and put into context previous 
experimental studies and will provide input for designing future research combining radiation and 
corrosion effects. 
1. The surface oxide is ~2-3 μm thick depending on the bolt with six – not three – distinct 
layers that vary based on composition and grain size. The innermost layer is Cr-rich and 
Fe/Ni depleted, and it has a rock salt crystal structure that is radiation-induced. This sits on 
top of thin Ni-rich layer at the surface of the metal. The next layer is both Cr and Fe/Ni-
rich with a spinel crystal structure. These two layers are formed by oxygen penetration into 
the metal, as interface between these and the outer oxides makes up the original metal 
surface. The next two layers are also likely commonly seen as the same layer, but these Cr-
rich and Fe/Ni-rich oxide layers are clearly distinguished primarily by grain sizes, with 
layer 3 being nanocrystalline and layer 4 being above ~100 nm in size. Layer 3 also was 
shown to vary most in its thickness between the two BFBs. Lastly, the outermost oxide is 
a Fe-rich oxide with a large grain size of ~500 nm. The general oxidation features corrosion 
behaviors in both unirradiated and ion-irradiated PWR water environments with the oxide 
layer phases matching that of prior irradiation studies, but the overall morphology of the 
surface oxide appeared to match that of unirradiated material. This could be due to the 
relatively low radiation flux in the BFBs compared to concurrent ion irradiation/corrosion 
experiments. 
2. The oxidized grain boundary attack appears like the commonly found grain boundary 
attack in irradiation/corrosion studies with features from IASCC studies: RIS at the grain 
boundary, dissolution of Si within the oxide, and localized deformation. However, there is 
a feature that is different as the original grain boundary that is enriched in Fe/Ni and 
depleted in Cr appears to act as a pathway for accelerating outward diffusion of Fe/Ni to 
the outermost oxide layers. The grains along this path interrupt the nanocrystalline interior 
oxide layers as they are larger and depleted in Cr. This pathway may fuel the growth of the 
outermost oxide nodules that decorate grain boundaries and may further enhance general 
oxidation and grain boundary attack.
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
18
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy, Light 
Water Reactor Sustainability Program Materials Research Pathway under contract DE-AC05-
00OR22725 with UT-Battelle LLC via Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The authors would like to 
thank Patricia Tedder and Travis Dixon at the Low Activation Materials Development and 
Analysis (LAMDA) Laboratory at ORNL, where SEM and TEM/STEM evaluation was 
conducted. Microscopy in LAMDA is a cost recovery center available for users through the US-
DOE Nuclear Science User Facilities. The initial handling and cutting of the bolts were done in 
the hot cells in the Irradiated Materials Examination and Testing (IMET) facility at ORNL. The 
Thermo Fisher Talos 200X STEM in LAMDA was purchased and funded through the US-DOE 
Office of Nuclear Energy Advanced Fuel Campaign and Nuclear Science User Facilities. The 
authors would like to thank the late Mike Burke who was involved in the bolt harvesting and 
characterization planning and led the sample preparation, machining, and shipping when he was 
working at Westinghouse Electric Company.
Data Availability
Data is available upon request.
References
1. Was, G.S., et al., How irradiation promotes intergranular stress corrosion crack initiation. 
Progress in Materials Science, 2024. 143: p. 101255.
2. Shoji, T., S.-i. Suzuki, and K.S. Raja, Current status and future of IASCC research. Journal of 
Nuclear Materials, 1998. 258-263: p. 241-251.
3. Ickes, M.R., et al., Irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking of Type 347 and Type 316 steels 
irradiated in commercial pressurized water reactors. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2020. 536: p. 
152182.
4. Wang, S., et al., Clarifying the mitigation effect of proton irradiation on the intergranular oxidation 
of 316L stainless steel in high temperature water. Acta Materialia, 2022. 241: p. 118408.
5. Du, D., K. Sun, and G.S. Was, IASCC of neutron irradiated 316 stainless steel to 125 dpa. Materials 
Characterization, 2021. 173: p. 110897.
6. Wang, S., et al., The time dependence of proton irradiation effect on the intergranular oxidation of 
316 L stainless steel in high-temperature hydrogenated water. Acta Materialia, 2023. 260: p. 
119340.
7. Wang, S., et al., Clarifying the irradiation effect on the general oxidation of 316L stainless steel in 
high temperature hydrogenated water after 1000h immersion. Acta Materialia, 2023. 255: p. 
119100.
8. Boisson, M., et al., Role of irradiation and irradiation defects on the oxidation first stages of a 
316L austenitic stainless steel. Corrosion Science, 2019. 161: p. 108194.
9. Deng, P., et al., Effect of irradiation on corrosion of 304 nuclear grade stainless steel in simulated 
PWR primary water. Corrosion Science, 2017. 127: p. 91-100.
10. Perrin, S., et al., Influence of Irradiation on the Oxide Film Formed on 316 L Stainless Steel in 
PWR Primary Water. Oxidation of Metals, 2013. 80(5): p. 623-633.
11. Raiman, S.S. and G.S. Was, Accelerated corrosion and oxide dissolution in 316L stainless steel 
irradiated in situ in high temperature water. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2017. 493: p. 207-218.
12. Raiman, S.S., D.M. Bartels, and G.S. Was, Radiolysis driven changes to oxide stability during 
irradiation-corrosion of 316L stainless steel in high temperature water. Journal of Nuclear 
Materials, 2017. 493: p. 40-52.

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
19
13. Liu, H., G.-H. Lei, and H.-F. Huang, Review on synergistic damage effect of irradiation and 
corrosion on reactor structural alloys. Nuclear Science and Techniques, 2024. 35(3): p. 57.
14. Wang, P., et al., Effect of radiation damage and water radiolysis on corrosion of FeCrAl alloys in 
hydrogenated water. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2020. 533: p. 152108.
15. Scott, P., A review of irradiation assisted stress corrosion cracking. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 
1994. 211(2): p. 101-122.
16. Lach, T.G. and X. Chen, Post Irradiation Examination of Pressurized Water Reactor Stainless 
Steel Internal Components, in ASME 2023 Pressure Vessels & Piping Conference, PVP2023. p. 
107347.
17. Ishiyama, Y., R.B. Rogge, and M. Obata, Radiation-induced stress relaxation in high temperature 
water of type 316L stainless steel evaluated by neutron diffraction. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 
2011. 408(2): p. 153-160.
18. Mogren, T., Response to Request for Additional Information RE: The 2011 Steam Generator Tube 
Inspections - R.E. Ginna Nuclear Power Plant, U.S. NRC, Editor. 2012, CENG, LLC: 
www.nrc.gov/docs/ML1205/ML12053A147.
19. Najafkhani, F., et al., Recent advances in the kinetics of normal/abnormal grain growth: a review. 
Archives of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, 2021. 21(1): p. 29.
20. Chang, L., et al., Effect of machining on stress corrosion crack initiation in warm-forged type 304L 
stainless steel in high temperature water. Acta Materialia, 2019. 165: p. 203-214.
21. Qian, H., et al., The effect of surface grinding on the stress corrosion cracking initiation of 316LN 
stainless steel in 600 °C supercritical CO2. Corrosion Science, 2024. 234: p. 112147.
22. Das, A., S. Roychowdhury, and V. Kain, Effect of surface state of austenitic type 304L SS on oxide 
characteristics formed in high temperature high pressure water. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 
2022. 564: p. 153672.
23. Lach, T.G., M.N. Gussev, and X. Chen, Complexity of segregation behavior at localized 
deformation sites formed while in service in a 316 stainless steel baffle-former bolt. Scripta 
Materialia, 2025. 255: p. 116371.
24. Terachi, T., et al., Corrosion Behavior of Stainless Steels in Simulated PWR Primary Water—Effect 
of Chromium Content in Alloys and Dissolved Hydrogen—. Journal of Nuclear Science and 
Technology, 2008. 45(10): p. 975-984.
25. Terachi, T., K. Fujii, and K. Arioka, Microstructural Characterization of SCC Crack Tip and Oxide 
Film for SUS 316 Stainless Steel in Simulated PWR Primary Water at 320°C. Journal of Nuclear 
Science and Technology, 2005. 42(2): p. 225-232.
26. Hemmi, Y., Y. Uruma, and N. Ichikawa, General Corrosion of Materials under Simulated BWR 
Primary Water Conditions. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology, 1994. 31(5): p. 443-455.
27. Chen, K., et al., A high-resolution study of the different surface state effects on the corrosion 
behaviors of a ferritic steel and an austenitic steel in supercritical water. Corrosion Science, 2022. 
209: p. 110757.
28. Hanbury, R.D. and G.S. Was, Oxide growth and dissolution on 316L stainless steel during 
irradiation in high temperature water. Corrosion Science, 2019. 157: p. 305-311.
29. Barr, C.M., et al., Anisotropic radiation-induced segregation in 316L austenitic stainless steel with 
grain boundary character. Acta Materialia, 2014. 67: p. 145-155.
30. Bosch, R.W., et al., Crack initiation testing of thimble tube material under PWR conditions to 
determine a stress threshold for IASCC. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2015. 461: p. 112-121.
31. Gussev, M.N., K.G. Field, and J.T. Busby, Deformation localization and dislocation channel 
dynamics in neutron-irradiated austenitic stainless steels. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2015. 460: 
p. 139-152.
32. Hanbury, R.D. and G.S. Was, Corrosion of 316L stainless steel in high temperature water and 
steam: Mechanisms of corrosion. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2024. 599: p. 155180.
33. Hanbury, R.D. and G.S. Was, Corrosion of 316L stainless steel in high temperature water and 
steam: effects of simultaneous proton irradiation. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2024. 600: p. 
155274.

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
20
34. Lee, H.B., F.B. Prinz, and W. Cai, Atomistic simulations of grain boundary segregation in 
nanocrystalline yttria-stabilized zirconia and gadolinia-doped ceria solid oxide electrolytes. Acta 
Materialia, 2013. 61(10): p. 3872-3887.
35. Wei, S., et al., Radiation induced segregation in titanium diboride. Acta Materialia, 2024. 267: p. 
119739.
36. Hosemann, P., et al., Characterization of oxide layers grown on D9 austenitic stainless steel in lead 
bismuth eutectic. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2008. 375(3): p. 323-330.
37. Jyung, J.-M., et al., Irradiation-induced age-related degradation mechanisms effect on integrity of 
baffle former bolts. International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, 2024. 208: p. 105116.
38. Kuang, W., et al., A high-resolution characterization of irradiation-assisted stress corrosion 
cracking of proton-irradiated 316L stainless steel in simulated pressurized water reactor primary 
water. Corrosion Science, 2022. 199: p. 110187.