===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
1.08 Radiation-Induced Segregation ☆
Maylise Nastar and Frédéric Soisson, The French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
r 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1.08.1 Introduction 236
1.08.2 Experimental Observations 237
1.08.2.1 Anthony ’s Experiments 237
1.08.2.2 First Observations of RIS 238
1.08.2.3 General Trends 239
1.08.2.3.1 Segregating elements 239
1.08.2.3.2 Segregation pro ﬁles 239
1.08.2.3.3 Temperature effects 239
1.08.2.3.4 Effects of radiation particles, dose, and dose rates 240
1.08.2.3.5 Impurity effects 240
1.08.2.3.6 Density of sinks 240
1.08.2.4 RIS and Precipitation 241
1.08.2.5 RIS in Austenitic and Ferritic Steels 242
1.08.2.6 RIS in High Entropy Alloys 243
1.08.3 Diffusion Equations: The TIP Formalism 244
1.08.3.1 Fluxes in Terms of L and ∇m 244
1.08.3.2 Fluxes in Terms of D and ∇C 245
1.08.3.2.1 ∇m– ∇C relationship 245
1.08.3.2.2 L – D relationship 246
1.08.3.2.3 Analytical solutions at steady state 247
1.08.4 Diffusion Equations: Application to Real Systems 248
1.08.4.1 Diffusion Equation Parameters From Experiments 248
1.08.4.1.1 Thermodynamic databases 248
1.08.4.1.2 Experimental evaluation of the kinetic coef ﬁcients 248
1.08.4.1.2.1 Interdiffusion experiments 248
1.08.4.1.2.2 Anthony ’s experiment 249
1.08.4.1.2.3 Diffusion under irradiation 249
1.08.4.2 L and D Coefﬁcients From Empirical Models 249
1.08.4.2.1 Manning-based model of concentrated alloys 249
1.08.4.2.2 Local concentration-dependent RIS model 250
1.08.4.3 Diffusion Equation Parameters From Atomic Models 251
1.08.4.3.1 Jump frequencies 251
1.08.4.3.1.1 Ab initio calculations 251
1.08.4.3.1.2 Interatomic potentials 251
1.08.4.3.1.3 Broken-bond models 252
1.08.4.3.2 Calculation of the phenomenological coef ﬁcients 252
1.08.4.3.2.1 Dilute alloys 253
1.08.4.3.2.2 Concentrated alloys 253
1.08.4.4 Comparison With Experiment 254
1.08.4.4.1 Dilute alloys 254
1.08.4.4.2 Austenitic steels 254
1.08.4.4.3 Ferritic steels 255
1.08.4.5 Challenges of the RIS Continuous Models 256
1.08.5 Simulation of RIS From Atomic Jumps 256
1.08.5.1 Creation and Elimination of Point Defects 256
1.08.5.2 Lattice Rate Models 257
☆Change History : April 2015. Maylise Nastar corrected Eq. (28). New references have been added mainly in Sections 1.08.2.5., 1.08.4.2.1., and 1.08.4.2.2.
January 2020. Added changes to the entire manuscript.
This is an update of Nastar, M., Soisson, F., 2016. Radiation-Induced Segregation. Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering , Elsevier.
Comprehensive Nuclear Materials 2nd edition, Volume 1 doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-803581-8.00668-8 235

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
1.08.5.3 Monte Carlo Simulations 257
1.08.5.4 Phase Field Models 259
1.08.6 Conclusion 260
Acknowledgments 261
References 262
Abbreviations
1nn ﬁrst nearest neighbor
2nn second nearest neighbor
AKMC atomic kinetic Monte Carlo
bcc body-centered cubic
DFT density functional theory
dpa displacement per atom
fcc face-centered cubic
IASCC irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking
IK inverse Kirkendall
MIK modiﬁed inverse Kirkendall
nn nearest neighbor
NRT Norgett, Robinson, and Torrens
PPM path probability method
RIP radiation-induced precipitation
RIS radiation-induced segregation
SCMF self-consistent mean ﬁeld
TEM transmission electron microscopy
TIP thermodynamics of irreversible processes
Symbols
D Diffusion coef ﬁcient Lij, L or L-coefﬁcient Phenomenological coef ﬁcient
1.08.1 Introduction
Irradiation creates excess point defects in materials (vacancies and self-interstitial atoms), which can be eliminated by mutual
recombination, clustering, or annihilation on preexisting or radiation-induced defects in the microstructure, such as surfaces, grain
boundaries, dislocations, or point defect clusters (dislocation loops and voids). As a result, permanent irradiation sustains ﬂuxes of
point defects toward these point defect sinks and, in case of any preferential transport of one of the alloy components, leads to a
local chemical redistribution. These radiation-induced segregation (RIS) phenomena are very common in alloys under irradiation
and have important technological implications. Speci ﬁcally in the case of austenitic steels, because Cr depletion at the grain
boundary is suspected to be responsible for irradiation-assisted stress corrosion, a large number of experiments have been
conducted on the RIS dependence on alloy composition, impurity additions, irradiation ﬂux and time, irradiation particles
(electrons, ions, or neutrons), annealing treatment before irradiation, and the nature of grain boundaries. 1– 5 Experimental
observations of nuclear materials at low and high radiation doses tend to prove that RIS on point defect clusters are precursors to
radiation-induced precipitation of secondary phases. 6 RIS modeling is therefore a necessary step in order to obtain a good
understanding of the materials stability under irradiation.
The ﬁrst RIS models consisted in adapting the Fick ’sl a w st or e p r o d u c et w os p e c iﬁc effects of irradiation: the
enhancement of diffusion due to the increase of point defect concentration, and the emergence of new driving forces
associated with the point defect concentration gra dients. According to these models, the kinetic coef ﬁcients D or L (deﬁned
below) relating atomic ﬂuxes to gradients of concentration or chemical potential determine RIS. The framework of the
thermodynamics of irreversible processes (TIPs) within the linear response theory yields the best de ﬁnition of these kinetic
coef ﬁcients. Because the methods of calculating kinetic coef ﬁcients and the associated dif ﬁculties are different in a dilute or
concentrated alloy, since the beginning, t here have been two types of RIS models, those dedicated to dilute alloys and those
to concentrated alloys.
Very recently, the dilute alloy models have bene ﬁted from progress made in the diffusion theories and from high throughput
DFT calculations of the point defect jump frequencies. 7 There are now automatic codes providing the phenomenological coef-
ﬁcients L in function of the atomic jump frequencies in multi-component dilute alloys, including the split-interstitial (dumbbell)
diffusion mechanism. 8 These codes allow the immediate use of extensive ab initio atomic jump frequency databases for a
quantitative and systematic estimation of the ﬂux couplings and sign of RIS with respect to temperature. 9– 12
While the progress of RIS models of dilute alloys is closely related to that of diffusion theory, most segregation models for
concentrated alloys still use oversimpli ﬁed diffusion models based on Manning ’s relations. 13 There are several reasons for this.
First, the parameterization of an atomic jump frequency model in function of the surrounding alloy composition requires a large
database of experimental diffusion coef ﬁcients, which are lacking and/or numerous ab initio calculations of atom jump fre-
quencies. Finally, the jump sequences of the atoms are particularly complex in a multicomponent alloy, on account of the multiple
jump frequencies and correlation effects that are involved. Only recently has an interstitial diffusion model been developed that
236 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
could account for short-range order effects, including binding energies with point defects in Fe – Cr concentrated alloys. 14
Numerous studies devoted to RIS in concentrated systems are experimental works, investigating the effect of temperature, com-
position of model and technological alloys, irradiation conditions, as well as the effect of point defect trapping by a an impurity,
and the nature and displacement of a speci ﬁc grain boundary. Most of the diffusion models of concentrated alloys rely on tracer
diffusion data, from which one estimates the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients of the RIS diffusion equation. Paradoxically, the ﬁrst RIS
models were more rigorous 15 than the present ones in which thermodynamic activities, particularly some of the cross-terms, are
oversimpliﬁed. In this review, we go back to the ﬁrst models starting from the linear response theory, albeit slightly modi ﬁed, to be
able to reproduce the main characteristics of an irradiated alloy.
Atomistic simulation methods such as atomic kinetic Monte Carlo (AKMC) methods 14,16– 20 have become ef ﬁcient tools to
simulate RIS. Thanks to a better knowledge of jump frequencies after the recent developments of DFT calculations, these simu-
lations provide a ﬁne description of the thermodynamics as well as the kinetics of a speci ﬁc alloy. Moreover, information at the
atomic scale is precious when RIS pro ﬁles exhibit oscillating behavior and spread over a few tens of nanometers. At the upper scale,
Phase Field methods start addressing the complex issue of the impact of the microstructure – point defect interaction on RIS,
including long-range elastic interactions between defects.
In the second section, we present discoveries and typical observations of RIS. In the third section, we rely on the formalism of
TIP to write the alloy ﬂux couplings. In section four, after a short review on available thermodynamic and diffusion data, we
discuss the approximations and limitations of empirical and atomistic RIS models applied to the analysis of real systems. We then
present the alternative approach based on atomistic modeling of jump mechanisms. The last section introduces multi-scale
simulation techniques of RIS.
1.08.2 Experimental Observations
1.08.2.1 Anthony ’s Experiments
RIS was predicted by Anthony 21 in 1969, a few years before the ﬁrst experimental observations: a rare case in the ﬁeld of
radiation effects. The prediction stemmed from an analogy with nonequilibrium segregation observed in aluminum alloys
quenched from high temperature. Between 1968 and 1970, in a pioneering work in binary aluminum alloys, Anthony and
coworkers 21– 25 systematically studied the nonequilibrium segregation of various solute elements on the pyramidal cavities
formed in aluminum after quenching from high temperature. They explained this segregation by a coupling between the ﬂux
of excess vacancies toward the cavities and the ﬂux of solute ( Fig. 1 ). Nonequilibrium segregation had been previously
observed by Kuczynski et al. 26 during the sintering of copper-based particles and by Aust et al. 27 after the quenching of zone
reﬁned metals.
Anthony suggested that similar coupling should produce nonequilibrium segregation in alloys under irradiation. 21,22 He
predicted that the segregation should be much stronger than after quenching because under irradiation, the excess vacancy
concentration and the resulting ﬂux can be sustained for very long times. 22,28 As for the cavities formed by vacancy condensation
in alloys under irradiation, which result in the swelling phenomenon, he pointed out that with solute and solvent atoms of
different sizes, segregation should generate strains around the voids. 28 Finally, he predicted intergranular corrosion in austenitic
steels and zirconium alloys, resulting from possible solute depletion near grain boundaries. 28
Anthony also presented a detailed discussion on nonequilibrium segregation mechanisms, in the framework of the TIP, 21– 24
showing that the nonequilibrium tendencies are controlled by the phenomenological coef ﬁcients Lij of the Onsager matrix,
which can be – in principle – computed from vacancy jump frequencies (see below Section 1.08.3). Clarifying previous
discussions on non-equilibrium segregation mechanisms, 26,27 he considered two limiting cases for the coupling between solute
Analyzed zone Z
Surface S
Aluminum matrix
Vacancy
condensation
cavity
Backscattered
electrons
ZnKa
Al2O3 film
e–
JVJZn
Fig. 1 One of Anthony ’s experiments. After quenching of an Al – Zn alloy, vacancies condense in small pyramidal cavities (left), under an Al 2O3
thin ﬁlm covering the surface. Electronic probe measurements reveal enrichments in Zn around the cavities. Reproduced from Anthony, T.R., 1970.
J. Appl. Phys. 41, 3969 – 3976.
Radiation-Induced Segregation 237

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
and vacancy ﬂuxes in an A – B alloy (at the time, he did not apparently consider the coupling between solute and interstitial
ﬂuxes and its possible contribution to RIS). In both cases, the total ﬂux of atoms must be equal and in the direction opposite to
the vacancy ﬂux:
(1) If both A and B ﬂuxes are in the direction opposite to the vacancy ﬂux ( Fig. 2(a) ), one can expect a depletion of B near
the vacancy sinks if the partial diffusion coefﬁcient of B is larger than that of A ( dBV 4dAV ); in the opposite case (dBV odAV ), one
can expect an enrichment of B (this was essentially the explanation proposed by Kuczynski et al. 26). Note that as long as
the solute concentration is not too small ( CB roughly below 1 at%), the tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients, DV
A/C3 and DV
B/C3 divided by
the equilibrium vacancy concentration, provide a good estimation of the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients, dAV and dBV
(cf Section 1.08.3.2. for a de ﬁnition of dAV and dBV).
(2) However, A and B ﬂuxes are not necessarily in the same direction. Whenever, the B solute atoms are strongly bound to the
vacancies, there is a chance vacancy drags a solute atom B by following circular jump sequences around B between two
exchanges with B. Then, the vacancy and solute ﬂuxes can be in the same direction ( Fig. 2(b) ): this was the explanation
proposed by Aust et al.27 In such a case, an enrichment of B is expected, even if the amplitude of dBV is higher than dAV. In that
case, the partial diffusion coef ﬁcient dBV is negative and cannot be related to DV
B/C3 .
Starting from an initially uniform solid solution, these mechanisms lead to formation of a gradient in solute concentration ∇CB
at the sinks, when the ratio of the total ﬂuxes JB=JA differs from CB=CA. In turn, ∇CB produces a back diffusion ﬂux, according to
Fick’s law. The competition between these two driving forces leads to steady state RIS concentration pro ﬁles. Unlike Anthony 's
quenching experiments, segregation under permanent irradiation is not a transient state. RIS pro ﬁles are sustained as long as there
is no drastic change of the sink microstructure. Indeed, the segregation of elemental species driven by the point defect con-
centration gradients, yields concentration gradients of the elemental species at the region of point defect sinks. In turn, chemical
driving forces arise to counter the built-up gradients resulting from the point defect concentration gradient.
1.08.2.2 First Observations of RIS
In 1972, Okamoto et al. 29 observed strain contrasts around voids in an austenitic stainless steel Fe – 18Cr– 8Ni– 1Si during irra-
diation in a high-voltage electron microscope. They attributed this contrast to the segregation strains predicted by Anthony. This is
the ﬁrst reported experimental evidence of RIS. Soon after, a chemical segregation was directly measured by Auger spectroscopy at
the surface of a similar alloy irradiated by Ni ions. 30
It was soon realized that if the solute concentration near the point defect sinks reaches the solubility limit, a local precipitation
would take place. In 1975, Barbu and Ardell 31 observed such a radiation-induced precipitation (RIP) of an ordered Ni 3Si phase in
an undersaturated Ni – Si alloy.
The analysis of strain contrast and concentration pro ﬁles measured by Auger spectroscopy suggested that undersized Ni and Si
atoms (which can be more easily accommodated in interstitial sites) were diffusing toward point defect sinks, while oversized
atoms (such as Cr) were diffusing away. Such a trend, later con ﬁrmed in other austenitic steels and nickel-based alloys, 32 led
Okamoto and Wiedersich 30 to conclude that RIS in austenitic steels was due to the migration of interstitial – solute complexes,
and they proposed this new RIS mechanism, in addition to the ones involving vacancies ( Fig. 2(c) ). Then again, Marwick 33
explained the same experimental observations by a coupling between ﬂuxes of vacancies and solute atoms, pointing out that
thermal diffusion data showed Ni to be a slow diffuser and Cr to be a rapid diffuser in austenitic steels. We will see later that, in
spite of many experimental and theoretical studies, the debate on the diffusion mechanisms responsible for RIS in austenitic steels
is not over.
Following these debates on RIS mechanisms, it became common to refer to the situation illustrated in Fig. 2(a) as segregation
by an inverse Kirkendall (IK) effect (the term was coined by Marwick 33 in 1977) and to the one in Fig. 2(b) as segregation by solute
drag effects, or by migration of vacancy – solute complexes. In the classical Kirkendall effect, 34 a gradient of chemical species
produces a ﬂux of defects. It occurs typically in interdiffusion experiments in A – B diffusion couples, when A and B do not diffuse at
the same speed. A vacancy ﬂux must compensate for the difference between the ﬂux of A and B atoms, and this leads to a shift of
the initial A/B interface (the Kirkendall plane). The IK effect is due to the same diffusion mechanisms but corresponds to the
(a) (b) (c)
JV
B JV
A Ji
AJi
B
JV
JV
B JV
A
JV Ji
Sink
Sink
Sink
Fig. 2 Radiation-induced segregation mechanisms due to coupling between point defect and solute ﬂuxes in a binary A – B alloy. (a)
An enrichment of B occurs if d BV o dAV and a depletion if d BV 4 dAV. (b) When the vacancies drag the solute, an enrichment of B occurs.
(c) An enrichment of B occurs when d BI 4 dAI.
238 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
situation where the gradient of point defects is imposed and generates a ﬂux of solute. The distinction between RIS by IK effect and
RIS by migration of defect – solute complexes, initially proposed for the vacancy mechanisms, was soon generalized to interstitial
ﬂuxes by Okamoto and Rehn. 35,36 RIS in dilute alloys, where solute – defect binding energies are clearly de ﬁned and often play a
key role, is commonly explained by diffusion of solute – defect complexes, while the IK effect is often used to explain RIS in
concentrated alloys. This distinction is re ﬂected in the modeling of RIS (see Section 1.08.3). However, it is clear that RIS can occur
in dilute alloys without migration of solute – defect complexes. Moreover, such a terminology and sharp distinction can be
somewhat misleading; the mechanisms are not mutually exclusive and result from the same microscopic diffusion mechanisms. In
the case of undersized B atoms, for example, a strong binding between interstitial and B atoms can lead to a rapid diffusion of B by
the interstitial (IK effect with dBI 4 dAI) and to the migration of interstitial – solute complexes. More generally, one can always say
that RIS results from an IK effect, in the sense that it occurs when a gradient of point defects produces a ﬂux of solute. Nevertheless,
because they are widely used, we will refer to these terms at times when they do not create confusion.
1.08.2.3 General Trends
Many experimental studies of RIS were carried out in the 1970s in model binary or ternary alloys, as well as in more complex and
technological alloys (especially in stainless steels). It became apparent quite early on that RIS was a pervasive phenomenon,
occurring in many alloys and with any kind of irradiating particle (ions, neutrons, or electrons). Extensive reviews can be found in
Russell,1 Holland et al.,2 Nolﬁ,3 Ardell,4 Was,5 Ardell and Bellon37: here, we present only the general conclusions that can be drawn
from these studies.
1.08.2.3.1 Segregating elements
From the previous discussion, it is clear that it is dif ﬁcult to predict the segregating element in a given alloy because of the
competition between several mechanisms and the lack of precise diffusion data (especially concerning interstitial defects). As will
be shown in Section 1.08.3, only the knowledge of the phenomenological coef ﬁcients Lij provides a reliable prediction of RIS.
Nevertheless, relying on the body of RIS experimental studies, several general rules have been proposed. In dilute binary AB alloys,
thermal self-diffusion coef ﬁcients DV
A/C3 and impurity diffusion coef ﬁcients DV
B/C3 are generally well known, at least at high tem-
peratures. Tracer diffusion or intrinsic diffusion coef ﬁcients in some concentrated alloys are also available. 38 RIS experiments do
not reveal a systematic depletion of the fast-diffusing and enrichment of the slow-diffusing elements near the point defect sinks: 4,32
this suggests that the IK effect by vacancy diffusion is usually not the dominant mechanism. On the other hand, a clear correlation
exists between RIS and the size effect 36; undersized atoms usually segregate at point defect sinks, oversized atoms usually do not.
This suggests that interstitial diffusion could control the RIS, at least for atoms with a signi ﬁcant size effect. There are some
exceptions: in Ni – Ge and Al – Ge alloys, the segregation of oversized solute atoms has been observed. Nevertheless, as pointed out
by Rehn and Okamoto, 36 no case of depletion of undersized solute atoms in dilute alloys has ever been reported. According to
Ardell,4 this holds true 25 years later.
1.08.2.3.2 Segregation pro ﬁles
Experiments show that segregation concentration pro ﬁles induced by irradiation display some speci ﬁc features. They can spread
over large distances – a few tens of nanometers (see Figs. 7 and 8 and other examples in Russell 1 and Okamoto and Rehn 32) –
while equilibrium segregation is usually limited to a few angstroms. This is because they result from a dynamic equilibrium
between RIS ﬂuxes and the back diffusion created by the concentration gradient at the sinks, while the scale of equilibrium
segregation pro ﬁles is determined by the range of atomic interactions. Equilibrium pro ﬁles are usually monotonic, except for the
oscillations, which can appear – with atomic wavelengths – in alloys with ordering tendencies. 39 Segregation pro ﬁles observed in
transient regimes are often non-monotonic because of the complex interaction between concentration gradients of point defects
and solutes. A typical example is shown in Section 1.08.5.3, where an enrichment of solute is observed near a point defect sink,
followed by a smaller solute depletion between the vicinity of sink and the bulk. In this particular case, the depletion is due to a
local increase in vacancy concentration, which results from a lower interstitial concentration and recombination rate.
Other kinds of non-monotonic pro ﬁles are sometimes observed, with typical ‘W-shapes’.40 In some austenitic or ferritic steels, a
local enrichment of Cr at grain boundaries survives during the Cr depletion induced by irradiation (see below). This could result
from a competition between opposite equilibrium and RIS tendencies. However, the extent of the Cr enrichment often seems too
wide to be simply due to an equilibrium property (around 5 nm, see, e.g., Sections 1.08.2.5 and 1.08.5.3).
RIS pro ﬁles at grain boundaries are sometimes asymmetrical, which has been related to the migration of boundaries resulting
from the ﬂuxes of point defects under irradiation. 41,42 The segregation is affected by the atomic structure and the nature of the
sinks. It has been clearly shown that RIS in austenitic steels is smaller at low angles and special grain boundaries than at large
misorientation angles, 43,44 the latter being more ef ﬁcient point defect sinks than the former.
1.08.2.3.3 Temperature effects
RIS can occur only when signi ﬁcant ﬂuxes of defects towards sinks are sustained, which typically happens only at temperatures
between 0.3 and 0.6 times the melting point. At lower temperatures, vacancies are immobile and point defects annihilate mainly by
mutual recombination. At higher temperatures, the equilibrium vacancy concentration is too high; back diffusion and a lower
Radiation-Induced Segregation 239

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
vacancy supersaturation completely suppress the segregation. Temperature can also modify the direction of the RIS by changing the
relative weight of V and SIA competing mechanisms, which do not have the same activation energy. We expect this competition
occurs in Fe– Cr alloys (cf Section 1.08.4.4.3). In Ni – Ti alloys, the enrichment of Ti at the surface below 400 1C has been ascribed to
the migration of Ti – V complexes, and the depletion observed at higher temperature should result from a vacancy IK effect. 45
1.08.2.3.4 Effects of radiation particles, dose, and dose rates
RIS can be observed for very small irradiation doses; an enrichment of B10% of Si has been measured, for example, at the surface
of an Ni– 1%Si alloy, after a dose of 0.05 dpa at 525 1C.35 Such doses are much lower than those required for radiation swelling 5 or
ballistic disordering effects. 46
Increasing the radiation ﬂux, or dose rate ( F), directly results in higher point defect concentrations and ﬂuxes towards sinks.
The transition between RIS regimes is then shifted toward a higher temperature ( Fig. 3 ). But because point defect concentrations
slowly evolve with the radiation ﬂux (typically proportional to F or
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
F
p 47 in the temperature range where RIS occurs), a high
increase is needed to get a signi ﬁcant temperature shift. However, within a given kinetic regime, the behavior of RIS differs from
that of a point defect concentration. For example, one has shown that in the kinetic regime dominated by point defect elimination
at sinks, the amount of RIS does not dependent on the radiation ﬂux as long as the point-defect sink strength does not vary. 20
Radiation dose and dose rate are usually estimated in dpa and dpa s /C0 1, respectively, using the Norgett, Robinson, and Torrens
model,48 especially when a comparison between different irradiation conditions is desired. It is then worth noting that the amount
of RIS observed for a given dpa is usually larger during irradiation by light particles (electrons or light ions) than by heavy ones
(neutrons or heavy ions). In the latter case, point defects are created by displacement cascades in a highly localized area, and a large
fraction of vacancies and interstitials recombine or form point defect clusters. The fraction of the initially produced point defects
that migrate over long distances and could contribute to RIS is reduced. On the contrary, upon irradiation by light particles, the
creation of Frenkel pairs is more or less homogeneous in the material, and most of them survive and migrate as isolated point
defects.49
1.08.2.3.5 Impurity effects
The addition of impurities has been explored as a possible way to control RIS in alloys, for example, in austenitic steels. The most
common method is the addition of an oversized impurity, such as Hf and Zr, in stainless steels, 50,51 which should trap the
vacancies (and, in some cases, the interstitials), thus increasing the mutual point defect recombination reactions at the expanse of
elimination reactions at sinks. However, the experimental investigations tend to show the suppressing of RIS by an impurity lasts
for a few displacements per atom only. This is certainly due to the kinetic drag of impurities by point defects toward sinks. A recent
DFT study demonstrates it almost systematically occurs whenever there is a large positive point defect-impurity binding energy, at
least in dilute FCC solid solutions. 11
1.08.2.3.6 Density of sinks
In the search for radiation tolerant materials, one devises microstructures with a high density of sinks as for example bulk nano-
layered Cu – Nb composites containing interfaces with controlled sink ef ﬁciencies.52 Multiplying point defect sinks reduce the
amount of RIS at a given sink. A simpli ﬁed RIS analytical model of multilayers separated by sink interfaces demonstrates the
amount of segregation decreases linearly with decreasing interface spacing. 20
0.0
10–6 10–5 10–4 10–3
K0 (dpa s–1)
10–2
0.2
T/Tm0.4
Radiation-induced
segregation
Back diffusion
Recombination
0.6
0.8
Fig. 3 Temperature and dose rate effect on the radiation-induced segregation.
240 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
1.08.2.4 RIS and Precipitation
As mentioned above, one of the most spectacular consequences of RIS is that it can completely modify the stability of
precipitates and the precipitate microstructure. 53 When the local solute concentration at a point defect sink reaches the
solubility limit, RIP can occur in an overall undersaturated alloy. RIP of the g0-Ni3Si phase is observed, for example, in Ni – Si
alloys31 at concentrations well below the solubility limit (Ni 3Si is an ordered L1 2 structure and can be easily observed in dark-
ﬁeld image in transmission electron microscopy (TEM)). In this case, we believe RIS is due to the preferential occupation of
interstitials by undersized Si atoms. 31 The g0-phase can be observed on the preexisting dislocation network, at dislocation loops
formed by self-interstitial clustering, 31 at free surfaces 49 or grain boundaries ( Fig. 4(a) ).54 The fact that the g0-phase dissolves
when irradiation is stopped clearly reveals the nonequilibrium nature of the precipitation. This is also shown by the toroidal
contrast of dislocation loops (cf Fig. 4 ): the g0-phase is observed only at the border of the loop on the dislocation line where
self-interstitials are annihilated; when the loop grows, the ordered phase dissolves at the center of the loop, which is a perfect
crystalline region where no ﬂux of Si sustains the segregation.
In supersaturated alloys, irradiation may completely modify the existing precipitation microstructure. It may dissolve pre-
cipitates located near sinks when RIS produces a solute depletion. For example, in Ni – Al alloys, 55 dissolution of g0 precipitates is
observed around the growing dislocation loops, due to the Al depletion induced by irradiation ( Fig. 5 ), and in supersaturated
Ni– Si alloys, Si segregation towards the interstitial biased sinks produces dissolution of the homogeneous precipitate micro-
structure in the bulk, to the bene ﬁt of the precipitate layers on the surfaces 31 (Fig. 6 ) and grain boundaries. 56
In these examples, RIS was observed to produce a heterogeneous precipitation at point defect sinks. But homogeneous RIP of
coherent precipitates has also been observed, for example, in Al – Zn alloys. 57 Cauvin and Martin 58 have proposed a mechanism
that explains such a decomposition. A solid solution contains ﬂuctuations of composition. In case of attractive vacancy – solute and
interstitial– solute interactions, a solute-enriched ﬂuctuation tends to trap both vacancies and interstitials, thereby favoring mutual
(a) (b) (c) 
Fig. 4 Formation of Ni 3Si precipitates in undersaturated solid solution under irradiation (a) in the bulk on preexisting dislocations and at
interstitial dislocations, (b) at grain boundaries, and (c) at free surfaces. (a) Courtesy of A. Barbu. Reproduced from Holland, J.R., Mansur, L.K.,
Potter, D.I., 1981. Phase Stability During Radiation. Warrendale, PA: TMS-AIME.
(110) g001
Fig. 5 Dissolution of g0 precipitates near dislocation loops in Ni – Al under irradiation. Reproduced from Holland, J.R., Mansur, L.K., Potter, D.I.,
1981. Phase Stability During Radiation. Warrendale, PA: TMS-AIME.
Radiation-Induced Segregation 241

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
recombination. The point defect concentrations then decrease, producing a ﬂux of new defects toward the ﬂuctuation. If the
coupling with solute ﬂux is positive, additional solute atoms arrive on the enriched ﬂuctuations, and so it continues, until the
solubility limit is reached.
1.08.2.5 RIS in Austenitic and Ferritic Steels
We have seen that RIS was ﬁrst observed in austenitic steels on the voids that are formed at large radiation doses. The depletion of
Cr at grain boundaries is suspected to play a role in irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking (IASCC); this is one of the many
technological concerns related to RIS. The enrichment of Ni and the depletion of Cr can also stabilize the austenite near the sinks,
and favor the austenite - ferrite transition in the matrix. 32 The segregation of minor elements can lead to the heterogeneous
precipitation of g0-precipitates (as in Ni – Si alloys), or various M 23C6 carbides and other phases. 1,32
The segregation of major elements always involves an enrichment of Ni and a depletion of Cr at sinks over a length scale that
depends on the alloy composition and irradiation conditions ( Fig. 7 ).5 Up to now, there is no de ﬁnite answer on the RIS
mechanism controlling the segregation of the major elements. 59 It is not clear whether it is driven by vacancy ﬂuxes, as suggested
by the order of the thermal tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients, DV
Ni/C3 oDV
Fe/C3 oDV
Cr/C3 ,33 or by the migration of interstitial – solute complexes,
resulting in the segregation of undersized atoms. 32 Some models of RIS take into account only the ﬁrst mechanism,5 while others
predict a signi ﬁcant contribution of interstitials to the diffusion of Ni. 60,61 For the segregation of minor elements, the size effect
seems dominant, with an enrichment of undersized atoms (e.g., Si 30) and a depletion of oversized atoms (e.g., Mo 62).
The effect of minor elements on the segregation behavior of major ones has been pointed out since the ﬁrst experimental
studies32; Si and Mo additions, by trapping vacancy, would enhance the vacancy-interstitial recombination rate which in turn
would reduce the RIS of both major and minor elements. As previously mentioned, oversized impurity atoms, such as Hf and Zr,
may also decrease RIS. 50
RIS in ferritic steels and ferritic/martensitic steels has recently drawn much attention, because they are possible candidates for
future Generation IV and fusion reactors. 63 Experimental studies are more dif ﬁcult than in austenitic steels, partly because of the
complex pre-existing microstructures. The behavior of some minor elements has been clearly identi ﬁed (such as the enrichment of
undersized Si and P atoms 63,64). However, the segregation of major elements (Fe and Cr) is still debated. Early experimental
studies reviewed by Lu et al.65 have shown both depletion and enrichment of Cr at grain boundaries, but it appeared quite dif ﬁcult
to distinguish correlations between the RIS behavior and the irradiation conditions or the alloy compositions. In some highly
concentrated alloys a depletion of Cr (sometimes with W-shaped pro ﬁles, see Fig. 8 ) and an enrichment of Ni have been
observed,63 reminding us of the general trends in austenitic steels. The addition of Hf has been found to reduce the Cr segregation,
again similarly to what occurs in austenitic steels. 64
More recently, systematic studies by Was et al.59,66 focusing on Fe – Cr model and industrial alloys with Cr contents between 9
and 12 at% generally displayed Cr enrichment at intermediate temperatures, and Cr depletion at higher temperature. The increase
in Cr content would favor the depletion. These behaviors are consistent with the predictions of recent modeling studies. They
(a) (b)
Fig. 6 Precipitate microstructure in Ni – Si alloys: the homogeneous distribution observed during thermal aging (a) is dissolved under electron
irradiation and the surfaces of the transmission electron microscopy sample are covered by Ni 3Si precipitates. (b) Ni – 12%Si alloy under 1 MeV
electron irradiation at 500 1C, after a dose of 5 /C2 10/C0 5 dpa. Courtesy of A. Barbu.
242 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
would result from the competition between vacancies and self-interstitials (cf Section 1.08.5.3). However, many observations do
not ﬁt this simple scenario, possibly because other factors may be involved. For example, it has been observed that the enrichment
of Cr at grain boundaries could increase up to a few dpa and decrease at larger doses 66 (a possible effect of the long term evolution
of the sink microstructure). Minor elements (especially C) may co-segregate with Cr, 67 or lead to the precipitation of other phases
affecting the Cr segregation. 68 The orientation and structure of grain boundaries 67,69 have also an effect. All these factors have a
stronger impact than in austenitic steels, leading to less predictable behaviors.
1.08.2.6 RIS in High Entropy Alloys
High entropy alloys, with equal or relatively large proportions of ﬁve or more elements have recently received considerable
attention, and a few experimental studies of RIS have been published. 70– 74
Irradiated to
∼1.5 dpa
W-shaped profile
Irradiated to
∼5 dpa
Cr depletion
Mill annealed
Cr segregation
LWR-irradiated 316SS
JEOL 2010F
0.7-nm probe
–20
13
14
15
16
17
18
19Cr concentration (wt%)
20
21
–15 –10 –5 0
Distance from grain boundary (nm)
51 0 1 5 2 0
Fig. 7 Thermal and radiation-induced segregation pro ﬁles in 316 stainless steel. Reproduced from Bruemmer, S.M., Simonen, E.P., Scott, P.M.,
Andresen, P.L., Was, G.S., Nelson, J.L., 1999. J. Nucl. Mater. 274, 299 – 314.
Chromium
Iron
Silicon
Nickel
502510
Distance from lath boundary (nm)
0–10–25–50–100
817
8
9
10
11
12
13
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
Concentration (wt%) (Ni, Si)
Concentration (wt%) (Fe)
Concentration (wt%) (Cr) 0.4
0.2
100
0
Fig. 8 Concentration pro ﬁles of Cr, Ni, Si, and Fe on either side of a lath boundary in 12%Cr martensitic steel after neutron irradiation to 46 dpa
at 465 1C. Reproduced from Little, E., 2006. Mater. Sci. Technol. 22, 491 – 518.
Radiation-Induced Segregation 243

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
Segregation at radiation-induced dislocation loops in CrFeCoNi, CrFeCoNiMn, and CrFeCoNiPd alloys have been observed
during electron irradiation, showing depletions in Cr/Fe/Mn/Pd and enrichments in Co/Ni. 70 The authors relate this behavior to
the atomic size of the elemental species. The formation of a L1 0 (NiMn) ordered phase and a spinodal decomposition between
Co/Ni and Pd (also observed during long term annealing) is accelerated by irradiation.
Barr et al. have observed Mn depletion and Co and Ni enrichment at grain boundaries, upon ion irradiation of an equiatomic
CoCrFeNiMn.71 According to tracer diffusion experiments, Mn is the fastest vacancy diffuser in these alloys and Co is the slowest
diffuser. These observations are consistent with a RIS mechanism dominated by a vacancy ﬂux coupling, the latter being modeled
trough an inverse Kirkendall process. Such a RIS mechanism is reminiscent of what is suggested in most of the RIS models of
austenitic steels.
1.08.3 Diffusion Equations: The TIP Formalism
RIS is a phenomenon that couples the ﬂuxes of defects created by irradiation to the atomic ﬂuxes of an alloy. In standard models,
only point defect diffusion mechanisms are considered, although displacement cascades produce mobile point defect clusters,
which may contribute to RIS. A RIS continuous model relies on diffusion-reaction equations modeling the evolution of vacancy,
interstitial and the elemental species of the alloy.
Far from sinks, we may transform a diffusion-and-annihilation at sinks process into a simple reaction event. For instance, in a
standard mean ﬁeld homogeneous rate theory, the evolutions of vacancy and self-interstitial atomic fractions (Confusions in the
deﬁnition of concentrations are a source of frequent mistakes. In the following, unless explicitly speci ﬁed, the concentrations of a
specie a is given in atomic (or molar) fraction, Ca. The atomic concentration, i.e., the number of atoms per unit volume, is Ca=O,
where O is the atomic volume), CV and CI are given by
dCV
dt ¼ K0 /C0 RCI CV /C0
X
s
k2
VsDV ðCV /C0 Ceq
V Þ
dCI
dt ¼ K0 /C0 RCICV /C0
X
s
k2
IsDI CI ð1Þ
where K0 is the point defect production rate (in dpa s /C0 1) proportional to the radiation ﬂux, R is the recombination rate, and DV
and DI are the point defect diffusion coef ﬁcients. The third terms of the right hand side in Eq. (1) correspond to point defect
diffusion and annihilation at sinks of type s. The ‘sink strengths’ k2
Vs and k2
Is depend on the nature and the density of sinks and have
been calculated for all common sinks, such as dislocations, cavities, free surfaces, grain boundaries, etc. 75,76 Numerical integration
of Eq. (1) yields the evolution of point defect concentrations and their variation with the radiation ﬂux and sink microstructure.
We may as well derive steady state analytical solution of Eq. (1) .47
A homogenous mean ﬁeld theory is not suf ﬁcient to model ﬂux couplings and subsequent RIS. We must start from the writing
of the diffusion-annihilation at sinks in terms of divergence of ﬂuxes J. The evolution of atomic fractions of vacancies, interstitials,
and chemical elements a in an alloy under irradiation is given by
∂CV
∂t ¼/C0 div JV þ K0 /C0 RCICV /C0
X
s
k2
VsDV CV /C0 Ceq
V
/C2/C3
∂CI
∂t ¼/C0 div JI þ K0 /C0 RCICV /C0
X
s
k2
IsDI CI
∂Ca
∂t ¼/C0 div Ja ð2Þ
The basic problem of RIS is to ﬁnd the solution of these equations close to a given point defect sink, which requires the knowledge
of how the ﬂuxes Ja are related to the concentrations. Note that the last terms of the point defect rate equations represent diffusion-
annihilation reactions of point defects at the other sinks, which are treated within a mean ﬁeld homogeneous approximation.
The modeling of the atomic and point defect transport controlling ﬂuxes relies on the theory of TIP. In this article, we start with a
general description of TIP applied to transport. We write atomic ﬂuxes in terms of the phenomenological coef ﬁcients of diffusion
(denoted hereafter by Lij or, simply, L) and the driving forces ∇m. Since what we measure and follow are the on-site average
concentrations of the elemental species, we express gradients of chemical potential,∇m, as function of gradients of concentration, ∇C.
The terms of proportionality between ﬂuxes and gradients of concentration are the so-called diffusion coef ﬁcients. Then, we deduce
steady state relationship between gradients of concentration of the elemental species and the vacancy gradient of concentration.
1.08.3.1 Fluxes in Terms of L and ∇m
Within the TIP, 77,78 a system is divided into cells, which are supposed to be small enough to be considered as homogeneous and
large enough to be in local equilibrium. The number of particles in a cell varies if there is a transfer of particles to other cells. The
244 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
transfer of particles a between two cells is described by a ﬂux Ja, and the temporal variation of the local atomic fraction of a is given
by the continuity equation
∂Ca
∂t ¼/C0 div Ja ð3Þ
The ﬂux of species a between cells i and j is assumed to be a linear combination of the thermodynamic forces,
Xb ¼ mj
b /C0 mi
b
/C16/C17
=kBT, where mi
b is the chemical potential of species b in cell i, T the temperature, and kB the Boltzmann constant. In
the continuous limit, Xb is obtained from the gradient of chemical potential: Xb ¼ ∇mb=kBT. Variables Xb represent the deviation of
the system from equilibrium, whose ﬂuxes tend to reduce:
Ja ¼/C0
X
b
LabXb ð4Þ
The equilibrium constants are the phenomenological (or Onsager) L-coefﬁcients. Since the point defect diffusion mechanisms
satisfy the detailed balance, the matrix of the Onsager coef ﬁcients is symmetric. Due to the second principle of thermodynamics,
the production of entropy is positive and consequently the Onsager matrix ( Lab)i sd e ﬁnite positive. By construction, the vacancy
diffusion mechanism leads to the relation between ﬂuxes:
JV ¼/C0
X
a
JV
a : ð5Þ
Eq. (5) yields relationships between the phenomenological coef ﬁcients. For instance, if we choose to eliminate the LV
Vb
coefﬁcients, we obtain this expression of the atomic ﬂuxes:
JV
a ¼/C0
X
b
LV
abðXb /C0 XV Þ: ð6Þ
Under irradiation, diffusion is controlled by both vacancies and interstitials. By construction, the interstitial diffusion
mechanism leads to the relation between ﬂuxes:
JI ¼
X
b
JI
b: ð7Þ
One assumes, vacancy and interstitial contributions to the atomic ﬂuxes are additive:
Ja ¼/C0
X
b
LV
abðXb /C0 XV Þ/C0
X
b
LI
abðXb þ XI Þ: ð8Þ
The total ﬂux of species a is thus expressed in terms of two Onsager matrices of size Nsp /C2 Nsp where Nsp is the number of
atomic species. Since every Onsager matrix is symmetric, it has Nsp /C2ð Nsp /C0 1Þ=2 independent L-coefﬁcients. While thermo-
dynamic data are usually available for the determination of driving forces in terms of gradients of concentration, it is very dif ﬁcult
to determine the whole set of L-coefﬁcients from diffusion data. Experimentally, we do not measure couples of ( L-coefﬁcient, ∇m )
but couples of ( D-coefﬁcient, ∇C). In the next section, we de ﬁne the driving forces as a function of concentration gradients, ∇C.
Then, we de ﬁne the experimental diffusion coef ﬁcients, D, in terms of the L-coefﬁcients and thermodynamic driving forces. The
last part of the section shows how to use ﬁrst-principle calculations for building atomic jump frequency models to calculate
macroscopic ﬂuxes of speci ﬁc alloys.
1.08.3.2 Fluxes in Terms of D and ∇C
Gradients of chemical potentials are the thermodynamic driving forces, which inform on the intensity of gradients of con-
centrations but also on the energy interactions between species. The latter make a chemical potential of a given species depend on
concentrations of the other species. In the ﬁrst part of the present article, we rely on the Gibbs – Duhem relationship and a
conservation law to express the ∇m– ∇C relationship. Then, we deduce the steady state RIS relationship between gradients of
concentration.
1.08.3.2.1 ∇m–∇C relationship
The chemical potential of species i corresponds to the partial derivative of the Gibbs free energy G of the alloy, with respect to the
number of atoms of species i, that is, Ni. The resulting chemical potential is a function of temperature and atomic fractions of the
alloy components, Ci ¼ Ni=N, N being the total number of atoms.
To obtain the ∇m– ∇C relationship, we rely on the Gibbs – Duhem relationship 77
X
k ¼ 1;r
Ck∇mk ¼ 0; ð9Þ
and the conservation law
X
k ¼ 1;r
Ck ¼ 1; ð10Þ
where the sum runs over the number of species including point defects, though in front of the interstitial concentration we need to
Radiation-Induced Segregation 245

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
add a minus sign. To deduce relationships between gradients of chemical potentials, we introduce either vacancies or interstitials
into the alloy. Indeed, we ignore the interactions between I and V and assume their interactions with atomic species are additive.
These interactions should be negligible because whenever I and V are close to each other, they annihilate through mutual
recombination reaction. From Eqs. (9) and (10), we deduce chemical potential gradient of atomic species i in terms of the alloy
and point defect driving forces
∇ mi /C0 mVðÞ ¼ /C0
XNsp /C0 1
k ¼ 1; ka i
Ck
1 /C0 CV
∇ mk /C0 miðÞ /C0 1
1 /C0 CV
∇mV
∇ mi þ mIðÞ ¼ /C0
XNsp /C0 1
k ¼ 1; ka i
Ck
1 þ CI
∇ mk /C0 miðÞ /C0 1
1 þ CI
∇mI
: ð11Þ
Note that in thermal conditions, we usually ignore gradients of point defect chemical potential by assuming point defects are at
local equilibrium with respect to the atomic species. Whereas, upon irradiation these gradients become the main driving forces.
From the Gibbs free energy, we deduce the alloy and point defect driving forces in function of concentration gradients. To
compute the alloy chemical potential gradients ∇ mk /C0 miðÞ of species k relative to species i, we ignore the point defect contribu-
tions. The latter is then equal to
∇ mk /C0 miðÞ
kBT ¼ 1
kBT
X
ja i
∂ mk /C0 miðÞ
∂Cj
/C18/C19
∇Cj ð12Þ
In a binary alloy, there is a unique alloy chemical potential gradient, ∇ mB /C0 mAðÞ . The corresponding thermodynamic factor is
deﬁned as
F ¼ CACB
1
kBT
∂ mB /C0 mAðÞ
∂CB
: ð13Þ
Under irradiation, point defects are not at equilibrium and elimination reactions at point defect sinks give rise to gradients of
point defect chemical potential. Therefore, in addition to the alloy chemical potential gradients, one accounts for point defect
driving forces. If one ignores point defect clusters contributions to the point defect chemical potential, one may write vacancy and
interstitial chemical potentials in terms of their equilibrium concentrations Ceq
V and Ceq
I respectively (dilute approximation):
mV ¼ kBT lnðCV =Ceq
V Þ and mI ¼ kBT lnðCI =Ceq
I Þ; ð14Þ
leading to an expression of the associated driving force 15
∇mV
kBT ¼ 1
CV
∇CV /C0 ξVA
CA
∇CA; with ξVA ¼ ∂ ln Ceq
V
∂ ln CA
: ð15Þ
The interstitial driving force has the same form, except that letter V is replaced by letter I. Note, that the equilibrium point defect
concentrations may vary with the local alloy composition and stress. Although the variation of the equilibrium vacancy con-
centration is expected to be mainly chemical, the change of the elastic forces due to a solute redistribution at sinks should not be
ignored for the interstitials. 15
Note that we introduce here a homogeneous formulation of the driving forces. The thermodynamic factors (i.e., partial
derivatives of chemical potentials with respect to concentrations) depend on the local values but not on the spatial derivatives of
the concentration ﬁeld. This corresponds to a standard approximation in diffusion. However, it may become an issue when
employed in continuous RIS models. Indeed, a typical RIS pro ﬁle covers a few tens of nanometers. It may feature an oscillating
behavior. Further, precipitation phenomena resulting from concentration spatial ﬂuctuations may occur. Therefore, we expect local
chemical potentials not only depend on the local value but also on the spatial derivatives of the concentration gradients. According
to Cahn and Hilliard, 79 the free-energy model of a non-uniform system can be written as a volume integral of an energy density
made up of a homogeneous term plus gradient energy terms proportional to the squares of concentration gradients. By ignoring
the latter, a RIS diffusion equation cannot produce physical phenomena controlled by an interface energy. In particular, a RIS
diffusion equation applied to the calculation of an equilibrium segregation pro ﬁle of a structural defect gives rise to a ﬂat proﬁle.
One cannot simulate an oscillating pro ﬁle resulting from a competition between the thermodynamic driving force of the equi-
librium segregation pro ﬁle and ﬂux coupling; and even less precipitation phenomena.
1.08.3.2.2 L –D relationship
A RIS model must be able to describe the reaction of a system to a gradient in the alloy composition but also to unusual driving
forces, such as point defect concentration gradients. We write then the driving forces in terms of concentration gradients and
introduce the diffusion coef ﬁcients as the constants of proportionality between ﬂuxes and concentration gradients. They are
functions of the L-coefﬁcients and partial derivatives of chemical potentials with respect to the atomic and point defect
concentrations.
A RIS model must also reproduce the atomic diffusion enhancement resulting from an increase of point defect concentration. If
we ignore the thermodynamic and kinetic contributions of point defect clusters, the L-coefﬁcients vary linearly with point defect
concentrations. To highlight the role of point defect concentration, one introduces normalized L-coefﬁcients, the so-called partial
246 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
diffusion coefﬁcients, which are point defect concentration free. 15,33,80 They depend on temperature and local alloy composition.
First expressions of the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients in terms of the L-coefﬁcients were from Howard and Lidiard 81 for the vacancy
in dilute alloys, from Barbu 82 for the interstitial in dilute alloys, and from Wolfer 15 in concentrated alloys. In the following, we use
the formulation of Wolfer because the approximations made to calculate the L-coefﬁcients and driving forces are clearly stated. In a
binary alloy (AB), ﬂuxes are separated into two contributions: the ﬁrst one induced by the point defect concentration gradients,
and the second one arising after the formation of chemical concentration gradients near the point defect sink 15:
JA ¼ CAðdAV ∇CV /C0 dAI ∇CIÞ/C0ð dc
AV CV þ dc
AI CI ÞF∇CA
JV ¼/C0 ð CAdAV þ CBdBV Þ∇CV þ CV Fðdc
AV /C0 dc
BV Þ∇CA
JI ¼ð CAdAI þ CBdBIÞ∇CI þ CI Fðdc
AI /C0 dc
BI Þ∇CA ð16Þ
where we de ﬁne the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients in terms of the L-coefﬁcients
dAV ¼ LV
AA þ LV
AB
CACV
dAI ¼ LI
AA þ LI
AB
CACI
dc
AV ¼ LV
AA
CACV
/C0 LV
AB
CBCV
þ dAV
1
F ζVA
dc
AI ¼ LI
AA
CACI
/C0 LI
AB
CBCI
þ dAI
1
F ζIA ð17Þ
Note that the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients d have the same units as the L-coefﬁcients or as a diffusion coef ﬁcient divided by the
atomic volume: m /C0 1 s/C0 1. ζVA is derived from the variation of the local equilibrium vacancy concentration with respect to the alloy
local concentration (see Eq. (15)). Flux of B is deduced from the ﬂux of A by exchanging the letters A and B. In a multicomponent
alloy, equivalent kinetic equations are provided by the Perks ’s model.83 In the latter, point defect concentrations are assumed to be
independent of the chemical species concentrations: in other words, parameters ζVA and ζVB are set to zero. Most of the RIS models
are derived from the Perks ’ model although they neglect the cross-coef ﬁcients and approximate the diagonal-coef ﬁcients by tracer
diffusion coef ﬁcients.5 The ﬂux of specie i is assumed to be independent of the concentration gradients of the other species. In
doing so, not only the kinetic couplings, but also some of the thermodynamic couplings are ignored. Indeed, as shown in Eq. (12),
a chemical potential gradient is a function of all the concentration gradients. However, relying on a CALPHAD database, Yang et al.
have improved the Perk ’s model by adding crossed-thermodynamic terms controlling the dependence of atomic chemical
potential on the full set of chemical species. 61 Yet, one must emphasize, improving RIS models dedicated to concentrated alloys is
not trivial, mainly because experimental diffusion data are lacking. An atomic ﬂux results from a balance between the so-called IK
effect, atomic ﬂuxes induced by point defect concentration gradients ( ﬁrst term of the RHS of Eq. (16)), and the back diffusion and
the Kirkendall (K) effect reacting against the formation of chemical concentration gradients at sinks produced by the IK effect (last
term of LHS of Eq. (16)). Eq. (16) can be used in both dilute and concentrated alloys. Differences between models arise when one
evaluates speci ﬁc partial diffusion coef ﬁcients.
The ﬁrst RIS model in dilute fcc alloys, designed by Johnson and Lam, 84 introduced an explicit variable for solute – point defect
complexes. The same kind of approach has been used by Faulkner et al. ,85 although it has been shown to be incorrect in speci ﬁc
cases.82,86 The ﬁrst RIS model derived from a rigorous estimation of ﬂuxes, with a clear correspondence between the atomic jump
frequencies and the L-coefﬁcients, was devoted to fcc dilute alloys, 87 and then to bcc dilute alloys. 88
In concentrated alloys, due to the greater complexity and the lack of experimental data, atomic-based diffusion models of RIS
are scarce. Most of them rely on TIP based diffusion equation, for which one uses empirical diffusion model as the Manning
approximation to compute the diffusion coef ﬁcients.
1.08.3.2.3 Analytical solutions at steady state
In steady state, the time derivative of atomic and point defect concentrations are zero, in particular at the point defect sink.
Therefore, the single ﬂux coming from the bulk, which controls the atomic concentration ( Eq. (3)) at the point defect sink is zero.
Step by step from the sink plane, we demonstrate every ﬂux of a given atomic species a is zero
Ja ¼ 0: ð18Þ
In case of a unique population of point defect sinks, setting to zero the time-derivatives of point defect concentrations in
Eq. (2) leads to the relationship
JV ¼ JI : ð19Þ
In a binary alloy, Eqs. (16) , (18), and (19) yield the Wiedersich ’s relationship between concentration gradients: 80
∇CA ¼ CACBdBI dBV
ðCBdBIDA þ CAdAI DBÞ
dAV
dBV
/C0 dAI
dBI
/C18/C19
∇CV ; ð20Þ
Radiation-Induced Segregation 247

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
where the intrinsic diffusion coef ﬁcient (normalized by the atomic volume) is equal to Da ¼ð dc
aV CV þ dc
aI CIÞF. The spatial extent
of segregation coincides with the region of non vanishing defect gradients. Note that, in the original paper, 80 the partial and
c-partial diffusion coef ﬁcients were taken to be equal. Such a simpli ﬁcation may change the amplitude of the RIS predictions. In a
multicomponent alloy, not only the amplitude, but also the sign of RIS might be affected by this simpli ﬁcation.
Note that Eq. (20) only gives the relationship between ∇CA and ∇CV . In the special case where the elimination of point defects
at sinks are dominant (i.e., when recombination is negligible) and for simple sink microstructures (thin ﬁlms), one obtains
analytical expressions of the point defect and solute concentration pro ﬁles, and of the total amount of solute segregation. 20 Main
result is the solute segregation does not directly depend on the dose rate but only on the density of sinks.
1.08.4 Diffusion Equations: Application to Real Systems
It is often dif ﬁcult to apply the previous models to a speci ﬁc system due to the lack of diffusion experimental data. Below, we
present a few experimental procedures to estimate both the driving forces and the L or D-coefﬁcients. We introduce then the
empirical models used to deduce the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients of a RIS model.
1.08.4.1 Diffusion Equation Parameters From Experiments
1.08.4.1.1 Thermodynamic databases
As shown in Eq. (13), we deduce the thermodynamic factor from a concentration derivative of the alloy chemical potential, which
in turn is a ﬁrst derivative of the Gibbs free energy per atom G of the alloy. Thus, we have
F ¼ CACB
1
kBT
∂2G
∂CB2 : ð21Þ
When available, we may obtain an expression of the Gibbs free energy G from a thermodynamic database such as CALPHAD. 89
The latter builds free-energy composition functions of the alloy phases from thermodynamic measurements (speci ﬁc heats,
activities, etc.) and phase diagrams. These databases mostly ﬁtted on high temperature experimental data are less valid at low
temperature. There is a CALPHAD database for most of the binary alloys and a few ternary alloys, as for instance FeNiCr. 90 In case
there is no thermodynamic database but a phase diagram, we may get a rough estimation of the Gibbs free energy from the regular
solution model. In the speci ﬁc case of a binary alloy A1– CBC with a clustering tendency, the regular solution model of the Gibbs
free energy per atom writes
G ¼ 2kBTcCð1 /C0 CÞþ kBTC lnðCÞþ kBTð1 /C0 CÞlnð1 /C0 CÞ; ð22Þ
where Tc is the critical temperature extracted from the phase diagram (corresponding to the maximum temperature of a miscibility
gap in systems with a clustering tendency). From Eqs. (21) and (22), we deduce the concentration-dependent thermodynamic
factor
F ¼ 1 /C0 4Cð1 /C0 CÞ Tc
T : ð23Þ
1.08.4.1.2 Experimental evaluation of the kinetic coef ﬁcients
The L-coefﬁcients characterize the kinetic response of an alloy to a gradient of chemical potential. In practice, what we impose is a
composition gradient. Thus, we switch to the D /C0 ∇C writing of ﬂuxes. Flux of a given species i follows then a generalized Fick ’s
law
Ji ¼/C0
X
j
Dij
∇Cj
O : ð24Þ
A diffusion experiment consists of measuring some of the terms of the diffusivity matrix Dij. These terms cannot be determined
one by one because at least two concentration gradients are involved in a diffusion experiment. Note, that the L-coefﬁcients can be
traced back only if the whole diffusivity matrix and the thermodynamic factors are known. Furthermore, most of the diffusion
experiments are performed in thermal conditions and do not involve the interstitial diffusion mechanism.
In the following section, we present two thermal diffusion experiments. Then, we review the few diffusion experiments
performed under irradiation. From these examples, we show how dif ﬁcult it is to obtain the whole diffusivity matrix.
1.08.4.1.2.1 Interdiffusion experiments
In an interdiffusion experiment, a sample A (mostly composed of A atoms) is welded to a sample B (mostly composed of B atoms)
and annealed at a temperature high enough to observe an evolution of the concentration pro ﬁle. We assume vacancy is at local
equilibrium and the gradient of vacancy chemical potential is zero. Therefore, according to Eqs. (4) and (16), the ﬂux of
component i in the reference crystal lattice is proportional to its concentration gradient:
Ji ¼/C0 Di
∇Ci
O ; ð25Þ
248 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
where the so-called intrinsic diffusion coef ﬁcient Di is a function of the phenomenological coef ﬁcients and the thermodynamic
factor:
Di ¼ O LV
ii
Ci
/C0
LV
ij
Cj
 !
F: ð26Þ
An interdiffusion experiment consists of measuring the intrinsic diffusion coef ﬁcients as a function of local concentrations.
Interdiffusion experiments have been performed in austenitic and ferritic steels. 38 The determination of the intrinsic diffusion
coefﬁcients requires the measurement of the interdiffusion coef ﬁcient and of the Kirkendall speed for each composition. 91 In
general, an interdiffusion experiment provides the Kirkendall speed for one composition only, leading to a pair of intrinsic
diffusion coef ﬁcients in a binary alloy. Therefore, few values of intrinsic diffusion coef ﬁcients have been recorded at high
temperatures and on a limited range of the alloy composition. Nevertheless, even if a complete characterization of the intrinsic
diffusion coef ﬁcients was possible, an interdiffusion experiment in an alloy of Nsp components gives access to Nsp intrinsic
diffusion coef ﬁcients, which is not enough to trace back the full L-coefﬁcient matrix comprising Nsp Nsp þ 1
/C0/C1
=2 independent
coefﬁcients. In addition, interdiffusion is a kinetic response to a chemical driving force, which is very different from the kinetic
response to a point defect concentration gradient. Anthony ’s diffusion experiment measures the ﬂux coupling induced by a
gradient of vacancy concentration, which is similar to what occurs under irradiation. Therefore, such an experiment should
complement the interdiffusion experiments.
1.08.4.1.2.2 Anthony ’s experiment
Anthony set up a thermal diffusion experiment involving vacancies as a driving force 21– 25,28,92 in aluminum alloys. A gradient of
vacancy concentration around a cavity is produced by a slow decrease of temperature. At the beginning of the experiment, the ratio
between solute and vacancy ﬂuxes is the following:
JB
JV
¼/C0 LV
BB þ LV
AB
LV
AA þ LV
BB þ 2LV
AB
ð27Þ
The volume of the cavity and the amount of solute segregation nearby yield a value for the ﬂux ratio. Note, that an analysis
relying on Eq. (27) neglects secondary ﬂuxes induced by the formation of a segregation pro ﬁle.
This experiment, combined with an interdiffusion annealing, could be a way to estimate the complete Onsager matrix.
Unfortunately, the Anthony’s experiment does not seem to be feasible in most alloys, especially in steels. In steels, vacancies do not
form cavities, and solute segregation induced by quenched vacancies is not visible when the vacancy elimination is not con-
centrated on cavities. In addition, we suspect the large attraction between vacancy and impurities such as oxygen, nitrogen and
carbon in iron hinders the formation of a vacancy chemical potential gradient at low temperature. 93
1.08.4.1.2.3 Diffusion under irradiation
In the 1970s, a few tracer diffusion experiments were performed under irradiation. 94 The main objective was to enhance diffusion
by increasing point defect concentrations and thus accelerate diffusion at low temperature. Another motive was to characterize
diffusion of the interstitials created by irradiation. In pure metals, some experiments were reliable enough to provide diffusion
coefﬁcient values at temperatures that were not accessible in thermal conditions. 94 The analysis of the same kind of experiments in
alloys happened to be very dif ﬁcult.95 One of the major dif ﬁculties is to be able to decouple the effect of temperature and
irradiation conditions on the microstructure from that on diffusion phenomena.
Another technique is to use irradiation to implant point defects at very low temperature. A slow annealing of the irradiated
samples combined with electrical resistivity recovery measurement highlights several regimes of diffusion; at low temperature,
interstitials with low migration energies diffuse alone, while at higher temperatures, vacancies and point defect clusters also
diffuse. Temperatures at which a change of slope is observed yield effective migration energies of interstitials, vacancies, and point
defect clusters. 96 In situ TEM observation of the growth kinetics of interstitial loops in a sample under electron irradiation is
another method of determining the effective migration of interstitials. 97
1.08.4.2 L and D Coefﬁcients From Empirical Models
In the previous section, we mentioned the dif ﬁculty in measuring the L-coefﬁcients of an alloy, especially those involved in ﬂuxes
induced by point defect concentration gradients. Diffusion data are especially dif ﬁcult to obtain for the interstitials. This is
probably why most of the RIS models emphasize the effect of vacancy ﬂuxes, with the interstitial contribution assumed to be
neutral. We present the main approximations used to address the lack of experimental data and estimate the partial diffusion
coefﬁcients of the vacancy diffusion mechanism. Then, we discuss a few applications to the modeling of RIS in real alloys.
1.08.4.2.1 Manning-based model of concentrated alloys
First diffusion model for concentrated alloys under irradiation is due to Marwick. 33 He introduced the concept of radiation-
enhanced diffusion by taking out vacancy concentration as a separate factor of the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients. We deduce the
L-coefﬁcient and the corresponding partial diffusion coef ﬁcients from a basic jump frequency model combined with the random
lattice gas diffusion model of Manning. 13 In this diffusion model, correlation effects are added as corrective terms of the basic
Radiation-Induced Segregation 249

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
jump frequencies. The resulting ﬂuxes33 are similar to Eq. (16) , except that the c-partial diffusion coef ﬁcients dc
AV , dc
AI are now
equal to the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients dAV , dAI , which is equivalent to neglecting cross L-coefﬁcients and the dependence of
equilibrium point defect concentration on alloy composition. However, for the ﬁrst time, one understands the segregation of the
major element, Ni, in concentrated austenitic steel is the result of a competition between fast- and slow-diffusing major alloy
components, Ni being the slow element and Cr the fast one.
After the relations of Manning, 13 we obtain an approximation of the L-coefﬁcients from the tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients DV
i/C3 of
element i:
LV
ij ¼ Ci
O DV
i/C3 δij þ 1 /C0 f0
f0
CjDV
j/C3
P
k CkDV
k/C3
"#
; ð28Þ
where DV
i/C3 is the tracer diffusion coef ﬁcient of element i via the vacancy diffusion mechanism. The same relations can be written for
the interstitial mechanism, even though in practice, we cannot measure the interstitial mediated tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients. The
Manning relations systematically predict positive partial diffusion coef ﬁcients which are directly related to the tracer diffusion
coefﬁcients
daV ¼ DV
a/C3
OCeq
V
: ð29Þ
Establishing a link between partial diffusion coef ﬁcients and tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients can be very useful because we have a
large database on tracer diffusion in model alloys of nuclear materials. However, we need to know the equilibrium concentration
of vacancy in order to extract the normalized partial diffusion coef ﬁcient from Eq. (29) . The latter may strongly depend on the
alloy composition and temperature, and directly measuring it is very dif ﬁcult.93 Note the Manning relations imply relationships
between the L-coefﬁcients of an alloy, reducing to Nsp the number of independent L-coefﬁcients. Such an approximation yields
satisfying results on the RIS behavior of the major alloy components of concentrated alloys as for instance in austenitic steels. 98 In
the latter, RIS is commonly thought of in terms of tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients. In binary alloys, one relies on the difference
½DV
A/C3 =DV
B/C3 /C0 DI
A/C3 =DI
B/C3 /C138 to predict the sign and the amplitude of RIS. However, such an approach may be not appropriate for the
investigation of RIS of impurities in concentrated alloys. The constraint of positive L-coefﬁcients implies no vacancy solute-drag
whereas recent ab initio studies demonstrate the vacancy solute drag of impurities is very frequent, at least in dilute alloys. 9,10
Since the solute drag mechanism is mainly due to the attraction between vacancy and solute atoms and the subsequent large
variation of the vacancy exchange frequencies with respect to its distance to the solute, we expect the minor elements in con-
centrated alloys to be potentially exposed to the vacancy solute drag mechanism. We are not aware of a RIS model encompassing
the solute drag mechanism in concentrated alloys.
Wiedersich et al. 80 added to Marwick ’s model a contribution of the interstitials. The global interstitial ﬂux is described by Eq.
(16), while preferential occupation of the dumbbell by a specie or two is deduced from the alloy concentration and the effective
binding energies. Such a local equilibrium assumption lies in the hypothesis of very large interstitial jump frequencies compared
to atomic jump frequencies. This kind of model yields an analytical expression of the ratio between the gradient of solute
concentration and the gradient of defect concentration in the stationary state (see Eq. (20) ). A little later, one has attempted to
establish the relationship between elementary interstitial jumps, their change of composition and the resulting diffusion coef ﬁ-
cients. From a microscopic description of the jump mechanism, one derives the kinetic equations associated with each dumbbell
composition.99– 102 Unlike previous models, there is no local equilibrium assumption, but correlation effects are neglected. Even
more sophisticated interstitial diffusion model including the correlation effects had been developed, 103 but due to the lack of data
for the interstitials, most of the concentrated alloy models have neglected the interstitial contribution to RIS. 83,104,105
1.08.4.2.2 Local concentration-dependent RIS model
Most of the RIS models assume thermodynamic factors equal to 1, although from the ﬁrst modeling paper, 15 the alloy ther-
modynamic factor was recognized to be varying with solute concentration. Similarly, the quantities ξva and ζIa of the point defect
driving forces depend on local concentration and stress ﬁeld.15,106 The shape of RIS pro ﬁle depends as well on the alloy
thermodynamic factor.107 Besides, Wolfer15 has demonstrated that RIS and its effect on the local thermodynamic factors affect the
repartition between interstitial and vacancy ﬂuxes and thereby, the swelling phenomena. The modi ﬁcation of sink bias might be
due to several factors: the wind of point defect of a Kirkendall interdiffusion process induced by the formation of RIS, or the
dependence of the point defect chemical potentials on local composition, including the elastic and chemical effects.
A local-concentration-dependent driving force is due to the local-concentration-dependent atomic jump frequencies. Following
this idea, the modi ﬁed inverse Kirkendall (MIK) model introduces partial diffusion coef ﬁcients of the form 104
dAV ¼ d0
AV exp /C0 Em
AV
kBT
/C18/C19
ð30Þ
The migration energy is written as the difference between the saddle-point energy and the stable state energy. It depends on
local composition through pair interactions calculated from thermodynamic quantities such as cohesive energies, vacancy for-
mation energies, and ordering energies. In fact, the present partial diffusion coef ﬁcients correspond to a mesoscopic quantity
deduced from a coarse-grained averaging of the microscopic jump frequencies. In principle, not only the effective migration
energies, but also the mesoscopic correlation coef ﬁcients and thermodynamic factors should depend on local concentrations.
250 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Nevertheless, the thermodynamic factors, correlation coef ﬁcients, and the ζVa factor are assumed to be those of the pure metal A.
More recently, a new continuous model suggested a multi-frequency formulation of the concentration-dependent partial diffusion
coefﬁcients. Instead of averaging the sums of interaction bonds in the exponential argument, every jump frequency corresponding
to a given con ﬁguration is considered with a con ﬁguration probability weight.18 Predictions of the model are compared with direct
RIS Monte Carlo simulations that rely on the same atomic jump frequency models. In the two presented examples, the agreement
is satisfactory. However, the thermodynamic factor and correlation coef ﬁcients are yet to be de ﬁned clearly. 18
1.08.4.3 Diffusion Equation Parameters From Atomic Models
As we have seen in the previous section, a full experimental determination of the concentration and temperature dependent
L-coefﬁcients is almost impossible to achieve. An alternative approach is to compute the L-coefﬁcients from the knowledge of
atomic jump frequencies. First-principles methods are now able to provide accurate values of jump frequencies in a given local
environment. In dilute alloys, only a few environments have to be considered and all the relevant jump frequencies can be
estimated. In concentrated alloys, the environments are too many and ab initio calculations too time consuming: we still need to
develop interatomic potentials and parameterized concentration-dependent model of the point defect jump frequencies. Once we
have built the jump frequency model, the L-o r D-coefﬁcients can be estimated from diffusion theories or from atomistic
simulations.
1.08.4.3.1 Jump frequencies
In the framework of the transition state theory, 108 the exchange frequency between a vacancy V and a neighboring atom A is given
by:
GAV ¼ nAV exp /C0 DGmig
AV
kBT
 !
¼ nAV exp þ DSmig
AV
kB
 !
exp /C0 DHmig
AV
kBT
 !
ð31Þ
when DHmig
AV is signi ﬁcantly greater than thermal ﬂuctuations kBT. DGmig
AV , DHmig
AV and DSmig
AV are respectively the Gibbs free energy,
enthalpy and entropy of migration and nAV is the attempt frequency. DHmig
AV corresponds to the increase of the total enthalpy when
A goes from its initial site on the crystal lattice to the saddle point between its initial and ﬁnal position. A similar expression holds
for self-interstitial jumps. The description of these jump frequencies, and of their dependence on the local atomic con ﬁguration,
encompasses all the information on the thermodynamic and diffusion properties of the system.
1.08.4.3.1.1 Ab initio calculations
Since the development of the density functional theory (DFT), ﬁrst-principle methods have dramatically improved our knowledge
of point defect and diffusion properties in metals. 109– 114 They provide a reliable way to compute the formation and binding
energies of defects, their equilibrium con ﬁguration and migration barriers, the in ﬂuence of the local atomic con ﬁguration in alloys,
etc. The DFT studies on self-interstitial properties – for which few experimental data are available – are of particular interest. They
have shown e.g., that the stable con ﬁguration is the [110] dumbbell in a-iron,115,116 and the [100] dumbbell in most fcc
alloys.113,114 More recently, one has demonstrated a systematic investigation of the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of
dumbbells in dilute Fe-based alloys, including the vibrational entropy contributions, is now feasible. 12
However, some limitations remain. Migration enthalpies are usually computed at 0K by the drag or by the nudged elastic band
methods.117 Migration entropies can be computed by phonon calculations within a harmonic or quasi-harmonic approximation,
but these calculations are especially expensive and since the jump frequency is less sensitive to the variation of DSmig
AV than to the
variation of DHmig
AV , they are frequently dispensed with (a constant DSmig
AV is assumed and integrated in the attempt frequency). More
generally, the determination of ﬁnite temperature effects is still incomplete. Direct calculations of DGmig
AV beyond the harmonic
approximation are scare and rarely applied to RIS problems. The modeling of magnetic transitions affecting both point defect and
diffusion properties (especially in iron-based alloys), is mostly phenomenological. 111,118,119 Above all, DFT methods are still too
time consuming to allow either direct simulations of the atomic displacement ﬂuctuations, ‘on-the-ﬂy’ calculations of the
migration barriers, or their prior calculation and tabulation for all the possible local con ﬁgurations (whose number increases very
rapidly with the range of interactions and the number of chemical elements). One recent exception is the measurement of self-
interstitial tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients in Ni – Cr alloy, by ab initio molecular dynamics. 120 An alternative approach is to develop
approximate models of local-concentration dependent jump frequencies for concentrated alloys, whose parameters are ﬁtted to
reproduce experimental data and/or ab initio calculations.
1.08.4.3.1.2 Interatomic potentials
Empirical or semi-empirical interatomic potentials, usually developed for molecular dynamics simulations, can be used for the
modeling of RIS, but one must address several issues:
 To get a reliable description of an alloy, the interatomic potential has to be adjusted on properties that control the ﬂux coupling
of point defects and chemical elements. A complete ﬁtting procedure would be very tedious and, to our knowledge, has never
been achieved for a given system.
Radiation-Induced Segregation 251

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
 Direct measurement of the L-coefﬁcients by MD are very demanding in CPU-time. Up to now, one is able to measure tracer
diffusion coef ﬁcients mediated by an SIA diffusion mechanism only. For example, Terentyev et al .121,122 have measured this
way the tracer diffusion coef ﬁcient of Cr and Fe in bcc Fe – Cr alloys with SIA. They have found that the preferential transport of
Cr by o1104 dumbbells should tend to an enrichment of Cr near point defect sinks in ferritic steels.
 At lower temperature, MD can be combined to a static calculation of jump frequencies in terms of attempt frequencies and
migration barriers. The direct calculation of migration barriers with an interatomic potential, even though much simpler than
DFT calculations, is still quite time consuming. Full calculations of vacancy migration barriers have indeed been implemented
in Monte Carlo simulations, 123 using massively parallel calculation methods, but they are still limited to relatively small
systems and short times, for example, for the study of diffusion properties rather than microstructure evolution. It is possible to
simplify the calculation of the jump frequency, for example, by not performing the full calculation of the attempt frequencies
(their impact on the jump frequency must be less critical than that of the migration barriers involved in the exponential term)
or by omitting the relaxation of the saddle-point position. 124 Malerba et al. have recently proposed another method where the
point defect migration barriers of an interatomic potential are exactly computed for a small subset of local con ﬁgurations, the
other ones being extrapolated using arti ﬁcial intelligence techniques. This has been successfully achieved for the modeling of
diffusion of vacancies in iron – copper alloys.125,126 Such techniques have not yet been used to model RIS, but this could change
in the future.
1.08.4.3.1.3 Broken-bond models
Because of these dif ﬁculties, simulations of diffusive phase transformation kinetics are commonly based on various broken-bond
models, in the framework of rigid lattice approximations. 5,127 The total energy of the system is considered to be a sum of constant
pair interaction energies, for example, eðnÞ
AB between A and B atoms located on nth nn sites. Interactions between atoms and point
defects can also be used to provide a better description of their formation energies and interactions with solute atoms, and other
defects. Concentration dependent pair interactions can be used to reproduced asymmetrical thermodynamic properties. 14
Various approximations are used to compute the migration barriers: a common one 128 is writing the saddle-point energy of the
system as the mean energy between the initial energy Ei and ﬁnal energy Ef , plus a constant contribution Q (which can depend on
the jumping atom, A or B). The migration barrier for an A – V exchange is then:
DEmig
AV ¼ Ef /C0 Ei
2 þ QA ð32Þ
where Ef – Ei corresponds to the balance of bonds destroyed and created during the exchange.
Another solution is to explicitly consider the interaction energy eSP
AV of the jumping atom A with the system, when it is at the
saddle point:
DEmig
AV ¼ eSP
AV /C0
X
i;n
eðnÞ
Ai /C0
X
j;n
eðnÞ
Vj ð33Þ
eSP
AV itself can be written as a sum of interactions between A and the neighbors of the saddle point. 60,129,130
We easily extend both approximations to the interstitial diffusion mechanisms, as long as we have experimental and/or ab initio
data to rely on for the ﬁtting of the interaction energies. The ﬁrst approximate model of the migration energy has the drawback of
imposing a linear dependence between the barrier and the difference between the initial and ﬁnal energies, which is not justi ﬁed
and has been found to be unful ﬁlled in the very few cases where it has been checked using empirical potentials. 123 The second
model should better take into account the effect of the local con ﬁguration and, according to the theory of activated processes, does
not impose a dependence of the barrier on the ﬁnal state. However, a model of pair interactions on a rigid lattice does not give a
very precise description of the energetic landscape in a metallic solid solution, so, the choice of approximations may not be crucial.
Taking into account many-body interactions ( ﬁtted to ab initio calculations, using cluster expansion methods) could improve the
description of migration barriers, but would signi ﬁcantly increase the simulation CPU time. 131,132
1.08.4.3.2 Calculation of the phenomenological coef ﬁcients
Given an atomic jump frequency model, transitions of the alloy con ﬁgurations are described by a master equation. With one point
defect in the system, a Monte Carlo simulation produces a trajectory of the alloy in the con ﬁguration space. The L-coefﬁcients can
be obtained from a Monte Carlo simulation. Measurements are performed on an equilibrated system using the generalized
Einstein formula of Allnatt: 133
Lij ¼ 1
O
〈DRiDRj〉
6t ð34Þ
where DRi is the displacement of the species i during time t. This numerical approach has proved its ef ﬁciency; however it is limited
to short ranges of composition and temperature. Simulations become rapidly unworkable when, for example, binding energies
between interstitials and neighboring atoms are signi ﬁcant.134,135 The simulated trajectory can be trapped in some con ﬁgurations
due to the correlation effects of the diffusion mechanism; after a jump, an atom has a ﬁnite probability to exchange again with the
same point defect and cancel its ﬁrst jump. The escape probability of the point defect from an atom decreases with the binding
energy between the two species.
252 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
In the limited case of dilute alloys, in which a few point defect jump frequencies are involved, it is possible to consider all the
vacancy paths and deduce semi-analytical expressions for the L-coefﬁcients. In concentrated alloys, mean ﬁeld diffusion models of
concentrated alloys yield approximate expressions of the transport coef ﬁcients.
1.08.4.3.2.1 Dilute alloys
The point defect jump frequencies to be considered are those that are far from the solute, those leaving the solute, those arriving at
a nn site of the solute, and those jumping from nn to nn sites of the solute. We may apprehend a solute diffusivity as a series in
which the successive terms include longer and longer looping paths of the point defect from the solute. A ﬁrst shell diffusion
model accounts for solute-PD interactions between 1NN sites only, so that the set of exchange frequencies to be considered is
small ( ﬁve in fcc, 7 four in bcc 7 and eight in hcp alloys 136 for the vacancy mechanism).
In the case of the vacancy diffusion mechanism, before the development of ﬁrst-principles calculation methods, 1nn vacancy-
solute interactions only were usually considered and jump frequency ratios could be estimated from a few experimental diffusion
coefﬁcients (three for fcc and two for bcc). Data were calculated from the solvent and solute tracer diffusivities, the linear
enhancement of self-diffusion with solute concentration, or the electro-migration enhancement factors of tracer atoms in an
electric ﬁeld.137 Some examples of jump frequency ratios ﬁtted to experimental data are displayed in published tables. 138 Cur-
rently, the most widely used approach is using ﬁrst-principles calculations to calculate not only the vacancy, but also the interstitial
jump frequencies. 12,113,114
Exact analytical expressions of the corresponding Onsager coef ﬁcients for these multi-frequency diffusion models can been
obtained.139 A very large database of self and impurity diffusion coef ﬁcients,140 and ﬂux couplings, 11 has recently been auto-
matically generated from high-throughput DFT calculations, 140 for more than 230 dilute solute diffusion systems in Mg, Al, Cu,
Ni, Pd, and Pt host lattices. The good agreement with experimental data con ﬁrms the validity of the approach. Thanks to the recent
development of more sophisticated diffusion models, which account for the variation of PD frequencies beyond the 1NN
interaction shell, one may investigate not only tracer diffusion but also ﬂux couplings. The latter crucially depend on the variation
of the PD frequencies with local environment. To compute them, we may use the code KineCluE (for Kinetic Cluster Expansion) 8
based on the self-consistent mean ﬁeld (SCMF) theory, 9,109,111,141,142 and for the speci ﬁc case of vacancy-mediated diffusion, the
code Onsager based on mixed SCMF-Green function formalism. 10 High throughput DFT approaches of low temperature ﬂux
couplings in dilute alloys have now become feasible. 9,10 In the high temperature regime, LAV and LBV are negative, and tracer
diffusion and solute-PD ﬂux coupling mainly depend on the exchange frequency of a vacancy with an atom of the matrix far from
the solute and the exchange frequency of a vacancy with the solute atom. Consequently, the knowledge of the self-diffusion and
solute diffusion coef ﬁcients usually provides a good estimation of LAV and LBV and of the vacancy-solute ﬂux coupling. This
corresponds to the traditional interpretation of RIS in terms of inverse Kirkendall effect: the elimination of vacancies leads to an
enrichment of solute B at sinks when dBVodAV and to a depletion when dAVodBV. However, at low temperature, large variations of
the vacancy exchange frequencies with respect to its proximity with solute atoms may yield sequences of strongly correlated
successive jumps of the vacancy. These correlations are the main contributors to the atomic-species off-diagonal Onsager coef ﬁ-
cients and determine the sign of ﬂux coupling between PDs and atomic species. In its course toward a point defect sink, the
vacancy turns around a solute atom by jumping from a neighboring site to another, then exchanges with it; and this way drags
solute atoms toward the sink. This solute drag mechanism is associated with a positive ﬂux coupling ( LBV 4 0). It results from a
subtle game of PD-solute binding energies and kinetic correlations and cannot be predicted from high temperature diffusion
experiments. Studies dedicated to Fe – X dilute alloys report such a systematic behavior with negative LXV at high temperatures and
positive LXV at low temperature. 9 The Fe– Cr system is a special case where the binding energy between Cr and V is especially weak.
Consequently, the drag effect occurs at lower temperature than in other Fe-based binary alloy: below 300K, where no RIS is
expected.
The amplitude as well as the sign of RIS depend on both vacancy and interstitial contributions. Very recently, one has
performed a similar systematic analysis of the solute-interstitial coupling in Fe-based alloys. 12 Preferential solute transport by
dumbbells occurs for P, Mn, and for Cr to a lesser extent.
The use of symmetry operations for the analysis of the PD transitions and the computation of the Onsager coef ﬁcients have
recently widen the investigations to more complex systems. 139,143,144 Let us mention the study of solute drag in strained
systems,109 in ternary alloys, 143 and in the hexagonal close packed magnesium crystal. 10
Finally, it is worth noting that in systems submitted to irradiation, the solute-point defect clusters are not necessarily in local
equilibrium with each other. In that case, we cannot use the TIP formulation of ﬂuxes. A recent extension of the SCMF theory
splitting the Onsager matrix of L-coefﬁcients into intrinsic matrices of cluster L-coefﬁcients, should be particularly useful for the
analysis of ﬂux coupling associated with a non-equilibrium cluster distribution. 8,145 As well the forced relocation of atoms within
a displacement cascade may be treated as an atomic diffusion mechanism, although it does not satisfy the detailed balance, i.e., it
does not drive the system toward the equilibrium state. Recent theoretical developments implemented into the code KineCluE
allow to take into account the effect of a forced relocation mechanism on steady state short range order and on ﬂux couplings.146
1.08.4.3.2.2 Concentrated alloys
The ﬁrst diffusion models devoted to concentrated alloys rely on a verybasic description of the diffusion mechanism. One equates the
alloy to a random lattice gas model where atoms do not interact and where vacancies jump at a frequency that depends only on the
species they exchange with (two frequencies in a binary alloy). Using complex arguments, Manning 13 could express the correlation
Radiation-Induced Segregation 253

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
factors as a function of the few jump frequencies. The approach was extended to the interstitial diffusion mechanism.103 Such diffusion
models, considering a limited number of jump frequencies, already make spectacular correlation effects appear possible, as for example
percolation phenomena when the host atoms are immobile.13,147,148 However, they do not account for the effect of short-range order
on the L-coefﬁcients although one knows that RIS behavior is often explained by means of a competition between binding energies of
point defects with atomic species, especially in dilute alloys. One made a few attempts to incorporate short-range order in a Manning-
type formulation of the phenomenological coefﬁcients, but coherency with thermodynamics was not guaranteed.149,150
The current diffusion models for concentrated alloys, including short-range order, are based on either the path probability
method (PPM) 151– 153 or the SCMF theory. 148,154– 157 Both mean- ﬁeld methods start from an atomic diffusion model and a
microscopic master equation. While the PPM considers transition variables, which are deduced from a minimization of a pseudo
free-energy functional associated to the kinetic path, the SCMF theory introduces an effective Hamiltonian to represent the non-
equilibrium correction to the distribution function probability and calculates the effective interactions by imposing a self-
consistent constraint on the kinetic equations of the distribution function moments. Diffusion models built from the PPM were
developed in bcc solid solution and ordered alloys, using nn pair transition variables, which is equivalent to considering nn
effective interactions, and a statistical pair approximation for the equilibrium averages within the SCMF theory. 151,152 The SCMF
theory extended the approach to fcc alloys 13,147,148 and provided a model of the composition effect on solute drag by vacancies. 155
The interstitial diffusion mechanism was also tackled. 135,158,159 For the ﬁrst time, an interstitial diffusion model including short-
range order was proposed in bcc concentrated alloys. 158 It was shown that the usual value of 1 eV for the binding energy of an
interstitial with a neighboring solute atom leads to very strong effects on the average interstitial jump frequency and, therefore, on
the L-coefﬁcients.
1.08.4.4 Comparison With Experiment
RIS almost systematically takes place upon electron, neutron and ion irradiation, even at very low radiation dose. In many cases,
we cannot achieve a full quantitative comparison between the RIS models and experimental observations, mostly because samples
are made from commercial alloys containing at least ﬁve different chemical species plus impurities while models simulate RIS in
binary and ternary model alloys. In addition, we generally simulate RIS as an isolated phenomenon while its amplitude and even
its sign (in ferritic steels) depends on the full radiation-induced microstructure. We present a few examples of investigations, ﬁrst in
dilute alloys, then in concentrated alloys. We close the section on the main challenges we still have to tackle.
1.08.4.4.1 Dilute alloys
RIS measurements in dilute alloys are less numerous than in concentrated alloys because the required grain boundary con-
centrations are usually smaller. However, some of the ﬁrst RIS observations concerned the segregation of a dilute element, Si, in
austenitic steels. In this speci ﬁc case, observations were easy because the RIS of Si goes along with the precipitation of Ni 3Si.
The ﬁrst mechanism proposed to explain the observed solute segregation was the diffusion of solute – point defect complexes
towards sinks.84 Since then, more rigorous models that rely on the linear response theory have been established and applied to the
RIS description of Mn and P in nickel 87 and P in ferritic steels. 86,88 Although good precision of the microscopic parameters was still
missing, the formulation of the kinetic equations was general enough to be used almost without modi ﬁcation.84 Recent ab initio
calculations not only provided accurate atomic jump frequencies of P in Fe, 115,160 but they also called into question the jump
interstitial diffusion mechanism that had to be considered. 160 Indeed, the octahedral and the (110) mixed dumbbell con ﬁg-
urations have almost the same stability and migration enthalpies. The resulting effective diffusion energy estimated by the
transport model was found to be smaller than the self-interstitial atom migration enthalpy, con ﬁrming the classical statement that
a solute atom with a negative size effect tends to segregate at the grain boundary. However, as emphasized in Meslin et al.,160 the
current interpretation of the interstitial contribution to RIS in terms of size effects is certainly oversimpli ﬁed. A very large ab initio
value of 1.05 eV for the binding energy between a mixed dumbbell and a substitutional P atom may lead to a large activation
energy for P interstitials and a drastic reduction of P segregation predictions. 160 To consider this new blocking con ﬁguration with
two P atoms, a concentrated alloy diffusion model including short-range-order effects is required.
A systematic RIS observation of Cr and minor elements in four martensitic-ferritic alloys irradiated with 2.0 MeV protons over a
range of doses (1 – 10 dpa) and temperatures (300 – 7001C) has been performed. A positive and a bell-shaped temperature
dependence of RIS in minor elements Si, Ni, and Cu have been observed. 66 DFT studies of dilute Fe-base binary alloys predict a
drag by vacancy of these minor elements and a positive RIS at temperatures below 700 1C.111,161,162 These theoretical results
although not performed on industrial multi-component alloys are consistent with the experimental observations.
1.08.4.4.2 Austenitic steels
Most of the RIS models for concentrated alloys were devoted to the ternary Fe – Cr– Ni system, which is a model alloy of austenitic
steels. The diffusion ratios used in the ﬁtting process are the ones extracted from the tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients measured by
Rothman et al. (referenced in Perks and Murphy 83 and Allen and Was 104) and more recently the ones collected by Jonsson 163 for
the model of Yank et al.61 In most of the studies, the input parameters are taken from Perks model. 83 The more recent MIK model,
which was initially based on the Perks model, used CALPHAD database to ﬁt its concentration-dependent migration energy
model,104 and the thermodynamic factors. 61 A signiﬁcant improvement in the predictive capabilities of RIS modeling was achieved
254 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
after a systematic comparison with RIS observations. RIS data which have been used for benchmarking the models are mainly
Auger spectroscopy measurements of RIS in Fe – Cr– Ni model alloys as a function of temperature, nominal composition, and
irradiation dose, 104 and scanning transmission electron microscopy-energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy pro ﬁles of neutron
irradiated stainless steels with respect to the radiation dose. 61
Every model reproduces the correct tendencies of RIS in austenitic steels: a depletion of Cr and an enrichment of Ni near a grain
boundary. Therefore, whenever the binding energies of point defects with atoms are not so strong and the ratios between the tracer
diffusion coef ﬁcients of the major elements are large enough (larger than 2 – 3), a rough estimation of the partial diffusion
coefﬁcients from tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients seems to be suf ﬁcient to reproduce the main tendencies.
As explained above, one often neglects interstitial contribution to RIS due to the lack of diffusion data. However, Stepanov
et al. 164 observed an electron-irradiated foil at a temperature low enough so that only interstitials contributed to the RIS.
Segregation proﬁles were similar to the typical ones observed at higher temperature. Parameters of the interstitial diffusion model
were estimated in such a way that the experimental RIS was reproduced. The migration energy of interstitials was assumed to be
equal to 0.2 eV, which is quite low in comparison with the effective migration energy deduced from recovery resistivity mea-
surements.165 More recently, parametrization of the interstitial diffusion model was achieved by relying on DFT formation energy
of the interstitials depending on their composition and experimental observation of RIS pro ﬁles.61 DFT calculations tend to
suggest Cr-rich interstitial is more stable than Ni-rich interstitial in the Fe-rich Fe – Cr– Ni alloys.166 Main conclusion of this new RIS
model is the dominant diffusion mechanism is the vacancy mechanism for Fe and Cr, while for Ni, the diffusion swings from a
V-dominant mechanism to a SIA dominant mechanism.
RIS in austenitic steels is commonly used as a benchmark to assess the representativity of neutron irradiation by ion and
electron irradiation. By relying on a point defect rate theory model, we may estimate the ﬂux-temperature transition lines between
the three main kinetic regimes, the thermal one (back diffusion), the one dominated by the elimination at sinks (RIS) and the one
dominated by recombination (see Fig. 3). Based on the same rate theory model, Mansur has derived analytical expressions of the
dose rate and dose dependence of the amount of absorbed point defects at sinks. 167 We may then deduce the shift of temperature,
which is required to keep the same amount of absorbed point defects after a change of the dose rate. Assuming RIS is mainly
controlled by the latter, the group of Was applies the temperature shift method to reproduce the RIS behavior of neutron-irradiated
austenitic steels by means of self-ion irradiation. 168 Nevertheless Eq. (20) shows RIS is not exactly sensitive to the amount of
absorbed point defects at sinks but to the gradient of a point defect concentration divided by its concentration. In the elimination-
at-sink dominant regime, the resulting RIS should not vary with the dose rate, unless the point defect sink microstructure has
sensibly changed. 20
The attempts of the ﬁrst MIK model to reproduce the characteristic ‘W-shaped’ Cr proﬁles observed at intermediate doses were not
conclusive: transitory proﬁles disappeared after a dose of 0.001 dpa, while the experimental threshold value was around 1 dpa. 40 The
more recent MIK model adding the interstit ial contribution to RIS and thermodynamic f actors different from one, highlight a ‘W-
shaped’ Fe and Ni proﬁles at 0.1 dpa.61 A study based on a lattice rate theory pointed out that an oscillating proﬁle was the signature of
a local equilibrium established between the surface plane and the next plane.169 This kind of mean-ﬁeld model predicts that the local
enrichment of Cr at a surface persists at larger irradiation dose (0.1 dpa), though not as large as the experimental value.
The role of impurities as point defect traps has been explored since the 1970s. 170 In those models, impurities do not contribute
to ﬂuxes but to the sink population as immobile sinks with an attachment parameter depending on an impurity – point defect
binding energy. 171 Other models account for immobile vacancy traps by renormalizing the recombination coef ﬁcient with a
vacancy– impurity binding energy. 164 Whether by vacancy or by interstitial trapping, the result is a recombination enhancement
and a decrease of point defect concentrations, leading to a reduction of RIS and swelling. Hackett et al.171 estimated some binding
energies between a vacancy and impurities, such as Pt, Ti, Zr, and Hf in fcc Fe, using ab initio calculations. The energy calculations
seem to have been performed without relaxing the structure, probably because fcc Fe is not stable at 0K. Although the absolute
values of the binding energies should be used with caution, one can expect the strong difference between the binding energies of a
vacancy with Zr (1.08 eV) and Hf (0.71 eV) to persist after a relaxation of atomic positions. In a more rigorous way, the trapping of
dumbbells could be modeled using the high migration energy associated with dumbbells bound to an impurity. 60 Such a model
would allow the impurity to migrate and change the sink density with dose. The same model could explain the recent experimental
results observing that, after a few dpa, RIS of the major elements starts again. 171
RIS in austenitic steels was observed to be strongly affected by the nature of the grain boundary, that is, by the misorientation
angle and the S value.44 One explains differences between the observed RIS by means of the so-called grain boundary ef ﬁciency,
which is taken into account in a modi ﬁed rate equation model. 44,99,105,172 Calculations of vacancy formation energies at different
grain boundaries, for example, in nickel in which atomic interactions are described by an embedded atom method, have been used
to model sink strength as a function of the misorientation angle. The resulting RIS predictions around several tilt grain boundaries
were found to be in good agreement with RIS data. 172 Grain boundary displacement and its effect on RIS were considered too.
Grain boundary displacement was explained by an atomic rearrangement process due to recombination of excess point defects at
the interface. New kinetic equations including an atomic rearrangement process after recombination of point defects at the
interface predict asymmetrical concentration pro ﬁles, in agreement with experiments. 105
1.08.4.4.3 Ferritic steels
More recently, a RIS model based upon the framework of the Perk’s model has been parameterized for ferritic steels.173 It relies on the
very strong assumption that every partial diffusion coefﬁcient is deﬁned by a single effective migration energy which value is selected
Radiation-Induced Segregation 255

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
among a set of DFT migration barriers computed in dilute con ﬁgurations. Despite this approximation, the model is able to take into
account the competition between the RIS contributions of self-interstitials and vacancies. The former prevails at moderate tem-
peratures, leading to Cr enrichment, the latter at higher temperatures, leading to Cr depletion – in good agreement with the
experimental results. The decreasing amount of Cr enrichment with increasing bulk Cr composition is also reproduced. 59,66,173
1.08.4.5 Challenges of the RIS Continuous Models
Ab initio calculations have become a very powerful tool for RIS simulations. They have been shown to be able to provide not only
the variation of the atomic jump frequencies with local concentration, 174 but also new diffusion mechanisms. 160 From a precise
knowledge of the atomic jump frequencies and the recent development of diffusion models, 155 a quantitative description of ﬂux
couplings is now feasible in dilute alloys. In concentrated alloys, it requires ﬁrst a development of a local concentration dependent
jump frequency model of both vacancy and self-interstitial, and second the computation of the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients and
the thermodynamic factors. Whereas both steps have been achieved in Fe – Cr alloys, 107 the ﬁrst step is still an on-going work for
austenitic steels.
Radiation induced precipitation following RIS is a common phenomenon. Including precipitation mechanisms in a con-
tinuous approach is not straightforward because it implies a quantitative modeling of the spatial concentration ﬂuctuations.
Adding ﬂuctuations within a deterministic approach requires a proper coarse graining method. 175,176 By introducing physical
concentration ﬂuctuations, they naturally produce thermodynamic and kinetic properties, which do not depend on the dis-
cretization of the solid. Even though, they are able to simulate precipitation phenomena in addition to ﬂux coupling, they rely on
a local equilibrium assumption within the cell, which prevent them to tackle nucleation phenomena featuring a critical nucleus
smaller than the discretized cell.
Although it has been suggested since the ﬁrst publications 33 that the vacancy ﬂux that counters the built-up gradients of RIS
could slow down the void swelling, the change of microstructure and its coupling with RIS have almost never been modeled. Only
very recently, phase ﬁeld methods have tackled the kinetics of a concentration ﬁeld and its interaction with a cavity population or a
single dislocation loop. The development of a simulation tool able to predict the mutual interaction between the point defect
microstructure and the ﬂux coupling is still challenging.
1.08.5 Simulation of RIS From Atomic Jumps
There are two main strategies to predict RIS from the atomic jumps. The ﬁrst one aims at computing the macroscopic parameters of
a RIS continuous model from the atomic scale, as explained above. The alternative approach is to perform full atomistic simu-
lations of the segregation, relying on the atomic-scale description of the point defect jump mechanisms. One advantage of the
method is that it does not require a diffusion model, based on speci ﬁc approximations, to make the link between the jump
frequency and the transport coef ﬁcient.
Molecular dynamics methods are much too slow – by several orders of magnitude – for microstructure evolution governed by
thermally activated migration of point defects. Atomic lattice rate models or Atomic Kinetic Monte Carlo (AKMC) methods are
therefore the appropriate technique to simulate nanoscale phenomena such as RIS. Phase-Field models are especially useful to
model large systems and the effect of elastic interactions, but their kinetic properties must be ﬁrst carefully parametrized using
another method, such as AKMC simulations. The dif ﬁculties are the same as for the modeling of diffusive phase transformations
(such as precipitation or ordering during thermal aging), although one has to deal with the non-conservation of the point defect
concentration resulting from several reactions: the point defect production, recombination and elimination at point defect sinks of
the microstructure. Besides, the self-interstitial jump mechanisms are usually more complex than the vacancy ones. 127
Validity of both approaches lies in the physical foundations of an on-lattice modeling of the point defect jump frequencies and
the interaction of point defects with the ever-changing microstructure.
1.08.5.1 Creation and Elimination of Point Defects
Because RIS is due to ﬂuxes of excess point defects, modeling must take into account their creation and elimination mechanisms.
For example, it must reproduce the ratio between vacancy and interstitial concentrations that controls the respective weights of
annihilation by recombination or elimination at sinks. The situation from this point of view is very different from phase
transformations during thermal aging, where usually only vacancy diffusion occurs, and simulations can be performed with
nonphysical point defect concentrations and a correction of the timescale. 129,174,177
During electron or light ion irradiation, defects are homogeneously created in the material, with a frequency directly given by
the radiation ﬂux (in dpa s /C0 1), a condition that is easily modeled in continuous models, mean- ﬁeld models,60,178 or Monte Carlo
simulations.17,161 The formation of defects in displacement cascades during irradiation by heavy particles can also be introduced
in kinetic models, using the point defect distributions computed by molecular dynamics. 179
The annihilation mechanisms at sinks such as surfaces or grain boundaries are, for the time being, simulated using very simple
approximations (perfects sinks, no formation/annihilation of kinks on dislocations, or steps on surfaces). This should not affect
256 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
the basic coupling between diffusion ﬂuxes, but the long-term evolution of the sink microstructure – which will eventually have an
impact on the chemical distribution – is not taken into account. Nevertheless, one may investigate the impact of the grain size and/
or point defect sink density on RIS by varying the distance between parallel perfect grain-boundaries. 20 Besides, one may introduce
in an empirical way the impact of point defect clusters contributing to the point defect sink population, and in turn to RIS. It has
been shown recently, a RIS simulation method combined with a mean ﬁeld cluster dynamics method simulating the evolution of
the point defect clusters, yields realistic simulation of radiation-enhanced precipitation in Fe – Cr.180
Thermally activated point defect formation mechanisms that operate during thermal aging, are taken into account in con-
tinuous simulation methods. 15,107,169,178 Simulations that do not include the thermal production are then valid only at suf ﬁ-
ciently low temperatures, when defect concentrations under irradiation are much larger than equilibrium ones.
1.08.5.2 Lattice Rate Models
The ﬁrst atomic scale models were mean ﬁeld lattice rate models. They included two thermally activated jump frequencies, one for
the vacancy and the other for the self-interstitial, ﬁrst as a direct interstitial diffusion mechanism 178 and later on as a dumbbell
diffusion mechanism. 60 Although modeled at the atomic scale, one computes the jump frequency as a function of a mean ﬁeld
migration energy depending on the mean ﬁeld occupation of surrounding lattice sites both at the saddle point and at the
equilibrium state. In general, one relies on a broken bond model to express the variation of migration energies in function of the
local composition. At that time, DFT studies were scarce. Hence, energy interactions were ﬁtted on thermodynamic data including
the phase diagram, surface and vacancy formation energy. Such a model is able to capture the local driving forces in an
approximate way but its description of the local dynamics of point defects is limited. In principle, atomic mean ﬁeld kinetic
equation do not encompass the kinetic correlations. It particular, they should be enable to model a change of kinetic regime with
respect to the variation of the local solute concentration, as for instance a transition from a solute drag ﬂux coupling to a solute-
vacancy negative ﬂux coupling. Nevertheless, in systems like austenitic steels, vacancy ﬂux coupling is always negative. Thus, one
may adopt an empirical approach and parameterize the vacancy jump frequencies to reproduce the macroscopic diffusion
properties of the alloy. 60 As for the self-interstitial parameters, we adjust them to reproduce the effective migration energies
extracted from resistivity recovery measurements. 165 The resulting local-concentration-dependent jump frequencies describe both
the kinetics of thermal alloys toward equilibrium and irradiation-induced surface segregation in concentrated alloys. Further,
describing diffusion at the atomic scale yields atomic details on the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of point defects and
atoms close to the point defect sinks. For instance, one may study the kinetics of establishment of a local equilibrium near a free
surface, acting as a source and sink for point defects. We model it by introducing above the surface, a buffer plane almost full of
vacancies. Hence, this mean ﬁeld method naturally takes into account the transition of a segregation pro ﬁle from the thermal
equilibrium one to the RIS one. Application to model alloys of austenitic steels highlights the ‘W-shaped’ proﬁle is a transient state
from the pre-irradiated enrichment to the strong radiation-induced depletion of Cr. 181 Therefore, both thermodynamic properties
and the ratio of the transport coef ﬁcients between Fe, Cr, and Ni determines an RIS pro ﬁle (Fig. 9). Note the predicted W-pro ﬁle is
not as wide as the experimental one.
What needs to be improved is the interstitial diffusion model. The lack of experimental and ab initio data leads to approximate
interstitial jump frequencies. Coupling between ﬂuxes is described partially as correlation effects are not accounted for. The recent
mean-ﬁeld developments 155 should be integrated in this type of simulation.
1.08.5.3 Monte Carlo Simulations
AKMC simulations can be used to follow the atomic con ﬁguration of a ﬁnite-sized system, by performing successive point defect
jumps.17– 19,179,182 In the framework of the chosen interaction model, the migration barriers are exactly computed using equations
such as (22) or (23), without any mean- ﬁeld averaging. The jump to be performed can be chosen with a residence time
algorithm,183,184 which can also easily integrate creation and annihilation events. 17,19 Correlation effects between successive point
defect jumps, as well as thermal ﬂuctuations, are naturally taken into account. This ensures that diffusion properties and
nucleation events are well described (the latter being especially important for the modeling of RIP). The downside is that AKMC
simulations are more time consuming than mean- ﬁeld models, especially when correlation or trapping effects are signi ﬁcant.
These advantages and drawbacks explain why AKMC is especially useful to model the ﬁrst stages of segregation and precipitation
kinetics.
AKMC simulations were ﬁrst used to study RIS and RIP in model systems, 17,18 to highlight the control of segregation by point
defect migration mechanism, and to test the results of classical diffusion equations. These studies show that it is possible – in
favorable situations, where correlation and trapping effects are not too strong – to simulate microstructure evolution with realistic
dose rates and point defect concentrations, up to doses of typically 1 dpa.
In simple cases, AKMC simulations validate the predictions of continuous models, on the basis of simple diffusion
equations17– 19: an example is given in Fig. 10 for an ideal solid solution, that is, when RIS can be studied without any clustering or
ordering tendency. 17 In this simulation, the diffusion of A atoms by vacancy jumps is more rapid than that of B atoms, and one
observes an enrichment of B atoms at the sinks due to the IK effect (A and B atoms diffuse at the same speed by interstitial jumps;
those jumps therefore do not contribute to the segregation). One can notice the non-monotonous shape of the concentration
Radiation-Induced Segregation 257

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
proﬁle, which corresponds to the prediction of Okamato and Rehn 32 when the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients are dBV/dAV o dBI/dAI.
In the more complicated case of a regular solution, Rottler et al. 18 have shown that the RIS pro ﬁles of AKMC simulations can be
reproduced by a continuous model, using a self-consistent formulation that gives the dependence of the partial diffusion coef-
ﬁcients with the local composition.
In alloys with a clustering tendency, AKMC simulations have been used to study microstructure evolution when RIS and
precipitation interact, either in under- or supersaturated alloys. 17,19 The evolution of the precipitate distribution can be quite
complicated as the kinetics of nucleation, growth, and coarsening depend on both the local solute concentrations and the point
defect concentrations (which control solute diffusion), concentrations that evolve abruptly in the vicinity of the sinks. 17 A case of
homogeneous RIP, due to a mechanism similar to the one proposed by Cauvin and Martin 58 (see Section 1.08.2.4), has been
simulated with a simpli ﬁed interstitial diffusion model. 185,186
Applications of AKMC to real alloys have been recently proposed. Copper segregation and precipitation in a-iron has been
especially studied, because of its role in the hardening of nuclear reactor pressure vessel steels. 161,179,182,187,188 These studies are
based on rigid lattice approximations, using parameters ﬁtted to DFT calculations. The point defect formation energies are much
smaller in copper-rich coherent clusters than in the iron matrix, 174 and there is a strong attraction between vacancies and copper
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.2
0.24
Cr (at.%)
Distance from grain boundary (m)
1d p a0d p a
13 dpa
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.2
0.24
−4 10–9 4 10–90 100–4 10–9 4 10–90 100
Cr (at.%)
Distance from grain boundary (m)
0.01 dpa0d p a
1d p a
Fig. 9 Comparison of Cr segregation pro ﬁles as a function of irradiation dose in FeNi 12Cr19 at T ¼ 635K. Left cell represents typical experimental
results of Busby et al . right cell is mean- ﬁeld predicted result starting from the experimental pro ﬁle observed just before irradiation. Reproduced
from Nastar, M., 2005. Philos. Mag. 85, 641 – 647. Busby, J.T., Was, G.S., Bruemmer, S.M., Edwards, D.J., Kenik, E.A., 1999. Mater. Res. Soc.
Symp. Proc. 540, 451.
–40
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.90
0.95
CBCB
Cd
10–10
10–9
10–8
10–7
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–11
10–12
10–13
–40 –20 0
d (nm)
20 40
Vacancies
Interstitials
CB
(c) 0.500 dpa
(b) 0.078 dpa
(a) 0.002 dpa Point defect sink1.00
–20 0 20
d (nm)
40
(a) (b)
Fig. 10 (a) Evolution of the B concentration pro ﬁle in an A 10B90 ideal solid solution under irradiation at 500K and 10 /C0 3 dpa s/C0 1,w h e ndAV 4 dBV
and dAI ¼ dBI; (b) Point defect concentration pro ﬁles in the steady state. Reproduced from Soisson, F.J., 2006. Nucl. Mater. 349, 235 – 250.
258 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
atoms in iron, up to the second-nearest neighbor positions. 115,174 AKMC simulations show that in dilute Fe – Cu alloys,
LCuV ¼ 2ðLCuCu þ LCuFeÞ is positive at low temperatures, because of the diffusion of Cu – V pairs. At higher temperatures, Cu – V pairs
dissociate and LCuV becomes negative. 161,162 The resulting segregation behaviors have been simulated, with homogeneous for-
mation of Frenkel pairs (i.e., conditions corresponding to electron irradiations). Only vacancy ﬂuxes are found to contribute to
RIS, the coupling with self-interstitials is negligible. Copper concentration increases near the sinks at low temperatures and
decreases at high temperatures. 161
Co-precipitation of copper clusters with other solutes (Mn, Ni, and Si) has been modeled by Vincent et al.179,182 and Wirth and
Odette188 under irradiation at very high radiation ﬂuxes and with formation of point defects in displacement cascades. AKMC
simulations display the formation of vacancy clusters surrounded by copper atoms, which could result both from the Cu – V
attraction (a purely thermodynamic factor) and from the dragging of Cu by vacancies (effect of kinetic coupling). The formation of
Mn-rich clusters is favored by the positive coupling between ﬂuxes of self-interstitials and Mn (DFT calculations show that the
formation of mixed Fe – Mn dumbbells is energetically favored).
Similar AKMC simulations have been recently applied to bcc Fe – Cr alloys, as a model of ferritic steels. 14,20 They provide an
estimation of the Onsager coefﬁcients, with their dependence on temperature and composition (Fig. 11(a)). According to Eq. (20),o n e
expects an enrichment of Cr at low temperature ( LCrI=LFeI4LCrV =LFeV )a n dad e p l e t i o na thigh temperature (LCrI=LFeIoLCrV =LFeV ).
Direct simulations of RIS at grain boundaries (Fig. 11(b) and (c))c o nﬁrm this prediction. These results are in qualitative agreement with
those predicted by simpler approximations.114,173 It is worth noticing the contributions of self-interstitials and vacancies are quite close,
especially above 600K (Fig. 11(a)). The balance between the two competing mechanisms is therefore delicate and small changes in the
migration barriers could reverse it. The variability of RIS behaviors observed in ferritic steels probably results from this situation. These
results are in qualitative agreement with the continuous RIS models and the experiments of Was et al.173
The same simulations have been used to study the interaction between precipitate microstructure and RIS in under – as well as
in super – saturated alloys. 14,20 Finally they have shown how RIS decreases with the density of grain boundary. 20
1.08.5.4 Phase Field Models
AKMC methods may be very time consuming and are limited to small systems. Phase Field (PF) models are able to tackle larger
systems and easily include long-range elastic interactions in addition to the chemical interactions. The PF method is a coarse-
grained method relying on a mesoscale diffusion equation. The solid is divided into cells, whose evolution is governed by a
mesoscale diffusion equation. When applied to the modeling of ﬂux couplings and RIS, parameterization of the diffusion
equation requires a careful methodology of the scale transfer from the PDs jump frequencies to the mesoscale thermodynamic and
Fig. 11 AKMC simulations of radiation-induced segregation in Fe – Cr alloys Evolution of the fractions of Onsager coef ﬁcients LCrV =LFeV and
LCrI =LFeI as a function of the temperature and alloy composition (a) and evolution of the Cr concentration pro ﬁle around a grain boundary in a
Fe– 10%Cr alloy at (b) 650K and (c) 950K. Reproduced from Senninger, O., Soisson, F., Martínez, E., et al ., 2016. Acta Mater. 103, 1.
Radiation-Induced Segregation 259

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
kinetic parameters. This method easily includes mesoscopic features of the microstructure such as point defect sinks including their
elastic interaction with point defects. The sink strength of the investigated microstructure features and its effect on the rate of
elimination of point defects emerge naturally from the method. We may also introduce equilibrium point defect concentration as
a boundary limit of a point defect sink. That way, the latter acts as a source of point defects. 107,189
We derive a PF diffusion equation from a TPI-based equation of atomic ﬂuxes similarly to Eq. (4), provided local gradients of
chemical potential are derived from a non-uniform free energy functional. This free energy depends on order parameters, which are
here local concentrations of chemical species and point defects, and strain ﬁelds. The free energy includes a local and a non-local
energy term including the long-range elastic interactions between cells. The non-local term (also called gradient energy term)
depends on the thermodynamic interface-stiffness parameter and the composition gradients. Note that recently, one has shown
kinetic contributions depending on the PD diffusion mechanism may contribute to the non-local term. 190 In principle, the free
energy of a Phase Field method must depend on the size of the cell. 175 Accounting for the cell size is crucial whenever one adds to
the diffusion equation a stochastic term for the modeling of concentration ﬂuctuations of atomic species or point defect clusters.
There are PF methods introducing a mixed discrete-continuous approach to capture the stochastic character of defect cluster
production in displacement cascades. 191
In case of a monotonic RIS pro ﬁle spreading over several nanometers, the local energy contribution to the chemical potential
mostly contributes to the free energy functional. In general, PF methods applied to RIS ignore the non-local contribution to the
free energy. 107,189 Without the cell size correction and ignoring non-local contributions, the mesoscopic diffusion equation is
equivalent to the standard RIS diffusion equation given by Eq. (16) . In a standard Cahn – Hilliard diffusion equation, there is a
single driving force, the alloy chemical potential gradient, which is the derivative of the alloy free energy with respect to the alloy
composition. One implicitly assumes PDs are instantaneously at equilibrium with respect to the local chemical species, which is
equivalent to removing gradients of point defect chemical potentials. In systems under irradiation, point defects are not at local
equilibrium. Therefore, in addition to the alloy driving force, we include the point defect driving forces and the corresponding off
diagonal L-coefﬁcients LV
Vb and LI
Ib.10 In dilute systems, one may employ semi-analytical methods to deduce the L-coefﬁcients from
ab initio data,8,139 whereas in concentrated systems one may rely on a computation of the L-coefﬁcients from AKMC simula-
tions.107 A PF method dedicated to RIS includes a sink and its interaction with all point defects and atoms. Unless the sink is a free
surface,189 one de ﬁnes a capture shape function of the sink, representing the capture zone of point defects (equal to 0 inside the
matrix and 1 in the capture zone). Absorption of point defect may make them move and even change shape. Most studies assume
sinks are immobile and do not change, meaning the shape function does not vary under irradiation. Although there are recent PF
models simulating the displacement of a free surface, 189 and dislocation climb resulting from a vacancy ﬂow.192
One has recently applied the PF method to the speci ﬁc study of RIS in Fe – Cr. The method relies on a diffusion equation fully
parameterized from AKMC simulations including the calculation of the equilibrium point defect concentrations, the thermo-
dynamic factors, the stiffness parameters, and the L-coefﬁcients.175 The resulting simulations of RIS are in good agreement with
direct AKMC simulations. Therefore, we can rely on it to simulate RIS in Fe – Cr of larger size and physical time as compared to
those of the AKMC simulations, and introduce the elastic interactions between point defects and sinks.
Point defects may interact with various stress ﬁelds from internal sinks or applied stress. One may address these elastic
interactions by relying on Eq. (4) and extending the set of order parameters in order to include the shape and elastic char-
acteristics of a sink. 193 In addition to cell concentrations of all point defects and chemical species, the set of order parameters
includes an elastic shape function of every sink associated with an eigen-strain deduced from the micro-elasticity theory. Main
difﬁculty is the computation of the resulting strain which one usually performs in the Fourier space through an iterative
procedure. This approach has been applied to the modeling of dislocation sink strengths 194 and RIS resulting from a bias sink
strengths between interstitial and vacancy at a dislocation loop in Fe – Cr.175 Since split-interstitials are more sensitive than
vacancy to a stress ﬁeld, the PD-sink interaction differs between both defects, leading to a stronger interstitial-sink interaction
and a larger sink strength associated with interstitial absorption. However, close to the sink the stress ﬁeld is not uniform and
one predicts a biased absorption of vacancy in compressive regions, leading to local changes of sign of RIS in Fe – Cr.175 Further,
one may account for the elastic effect on the L-coefﬁcients relying on the elasto-diffusion formalism, 133 and the ﬁrst principles
calculation of the elastic dipoles characterizing the elastic properties of a point defect in a speci ﬁc local environment. 176 An
elasto-diffusion study of vacancy diffusion in dilute Ni(Si) alloys has highlighted the potential change of sign of the ﬂux
coupling between vacancy and Si with respect to the strain ﬁeld and the direction of diffusion. The resulting Si ﬂow near a
dislocation core is a complex spatial-and-temperature-dependent function of the vacancy ﬂow. It is mostly due to the interplay
between the symmetry reduction of the migrating atom at the saddle point and the elastic ﬁeld.109 Incorporating elasto-
diffusion into the split-interstitial diffusion mechanism should lead to even more complex ﬂux couplings due to the symmetry
break generated by the elastic ﬁeld between dumbbells with different orientations.
1.08.6 Conclusion
We started this review with a summary of the experimental activity on RIS. Intensive experimental work has been devoted to
austenitic steels and their model fcc alloys (Ni – Si, Ni– Cr, and Ni – Fe– Cr) and, more recently, to ferritic steels. RIS strongly depends
on the radiation ﬂux and dose, temperature, composition, the grain boundary type, and the point defect sink microstructure. As
RIS is a rather deleterious phenomenon, many research teams have focused on reducing it. Addition of large-sized impurities, such
260 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
as Zr and Hf, was shown to preclude RIS. Impurities would trap point defects and enhance this way direct recombination reactions
between point defects. 50 However, experimental observations and a systematic KineCluE calculation of ﬂux coupling from
DFT-based vacancy jump frequencies tend to show the inhibitory role of most impurities is fading away after a radiation dose of a
few dpa. On the other hand, the Cr depletion at grain boundaries was observed to be delayed when the grain boundary was
enriched in Cr before irradiation. A ‘W-shaped’ transitory pro ﬁle could be maintained until a few dpa before the grain boundary
was depleted in Cr. 40 Even though the development of RIS models was tightly related to the experimental investigations, the
underlying mechanisms of an oscillatory pro ﬁle are still not well understood.
Meantime, the main mechanisms controlling RIS were brought forward before the phenomenon was even observed. From the
very ﬁrst models, one has introduced enhancement of diffusion, ﬂux couplings and point defect driving forces. A RIS model
consists of a set of diffusion equations in which we write ﬂuxes of point defects and atoms as generalized Fick ’s laws. The partial
diffusion coef ﬁcients of these Fick ’s laws are function of the phenomenological L-coefﬁcients of TIP.
The formidable progress of the ab initio studies addressing point defect properties in alloys and the most recent development of
automated calculation codes of the L-coefﬁcients (KineCluE8 and Onsager139), totally change the situation. First-principles methods
relying on the DFT have improved so fast in the last decades that they are able to provide us with large databases of activation energies
of both vacancy and interstitial jump freque ncies as a function of local environment. 8,12 Meanwhile, due to recent development of
diffusion theories,8 it is now possible to overcome the arti ﬁcial dichotomy between dilute and concentrated diffusion models and for
instance, develop a RIS model including a change of sign of the ﬂux coupling with local composition. As a consequence, nowadays, it
seems easier to calculate theL-coefﬁcients and their associated partial diffusion coefﬁcients from ﬁrst-principles calculations rather than
estimating them from diffusion experiments. Besides, the recent ab initio investigations of RIS in dilute alloys have demonstrated that
an extrapolation of diffusion properties from high temperature diffusion experiments almost systematically leads to the wrong sign of
the vacancy-solute ﬂux coupling in Fe-based alloys.
While in dilute alloys, diffusion theories yield now ef ﬁcient codes to address the calculation of the L-coefﬁcients from atomic
jump frequencies, in concentrated alloys one employs numerical approaches relying on AKMC simulations or mean ﬁeld
approximate methods. In particular, diffusion models addressing RIS in austenitic steels have lost over the years the proper
deﬁnition of the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients of the Fick ’s laws in terms of the phenomenological L-coefﬁcients. We explain it by
the fact that both experimental diffusion data and ab initio investigations of thermodynamic and kinetic point defect properties
are still lacking, especially for interstitials. For years, the available diffusion data consisted mainly of tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients,
and the RIS models still rely on the empirical Manning relations 195 to get an estimation of the partial diffusion coef ﬁcients in
function of tracer diffusion coef ﬁcients.61
An alternative approach to continuous diffusion equations is the development of atomistic-scale simulations, such as Monte Carlo
simulations, which are quite appropriate to study the nanoscale RIS phenomenon. Concerning the ferritic steels, atomistic modeling of
RIS in model alloys of ferritic steels has at least contributed to explain the puzzling variety of Cr enrichments and depletions observed
experimentally.14 As already noticed by Choudhury et al.,114 RIS of Cr depends on a subtle balance between an enrichment driven by
the elimination of self-interstitials and a depletion driven by the elimination of vacancies. Moreover, the Onsager coefﬁcients controlling
RIS are very sensitive to small differences in the migration barriers. 111 Therefore, even though the various models suggest a similar
temperature dependence of RIS, the key point is probably that any other factor modifying these barriers (i.e., the magnetic transition,
additional alloying elements, elastic stress between sinks and solutes, etc.) may change the ﬁnal result.
Note that the situation is different in austenitic steels. We do systematically observe positive segregation of Ni and negative
segregation Cr whatever the temperature and the composition of alloys. A possible explanation is that self-interstitials and
vacancies do not compete; though, the interstitial coupling contribution is still debated. It is rather believed to be either negli-
gible104 or to reinforce the vacancy contribution, 60 although a recent study tends to show the opposite. 61
Monte Carlo simulations are now able to embrace the full complexity of RIS phenomena, including vacancy and split
interstitial diffusion mechanisms, the whole ﬂux coupling, the resulting segregation, and eventual nucleation at grain bound-
aries.14 However, these simulations become heavy time-consuming when correlation effects are important. Using this method or
atomic diffusion theories to feed a PF method may be the most promising approach. One has successfully achieved it to simulate
RIS in Fe – Cr.107 A PF method gives new insights on the isolated contribution to RIS of each physical parameter of the diffusion
equation and on the interplay between the elastic point defect – sink interaction and RIS. 193 In the next future, we should be able
to encompass the entire microstructure and its interaction with all point defects and atoms, provided the stochastic nature of point
defect cluster and secondary phase precipitation are included in a proper way.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to the Program NEEDS-France that supported part of this work through the MESIR project.
See also : 1.04 Radiation-Induced Effects on Microstructure. 1.05 Effect of Radiation on Strength and Ductility of Metals and Alloys. 1.13 Radiation
Damage Correlation. 1.25 Phase Field Methods. 1.26 Computational Thermodynamics: Application to Nuclear Materials. 1.27 Computational
Kinetics: Application to Nuclear Materials
Radiation-Induced Segregation 261

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
References
1. Russell, K.C., 1984. Prog. Mater. Sci. 28, 229.
2. Holland, J.R., Mansur, L.K., Potter, D.I., 1981. Phase Stability During Radiation. Warrendale, PA: TMS-AIME.
3. Nolﬁ, F.V., 1983. Phase Stability During Radiation. London and New York: Applied Science.
4. Ardell, A.J., 2008. In: Ghetta, V., Gorse, D., Mazière, D., Pontikis, V. (Eds.), Materials Issues for Generation IV Systems. Netherlands: Springer, pp. 285 – 310.
5. Was, G.S., 2007. Fundamentals of Radiation Materials Science: Metals and Alloys. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
6. Dong, Y., Sencer, B.H., Garner, F.A., Marquis, E.A., 2015. J. Nucl. Mater. 467, 692.
7. Allnatt, A.R., Lidiard, A.B., 2003. Atomic Transport in Solids. Cambridge University Press.
8. Schuler, T., Messina, L., Nastar, M., 2020. Comput. Mater. Sci. 172, 109191.
9. Messina, L., Nastar, M., Sandberg, N., Olsson, P., 2016. Phys. Rev. B 93, 184302.
10. Agarwal, R., Trinkle, D.R., 2018. Acta Mater. 150, 339.
11. Schuler, T., Bellon, P., Trinkle, D.R., Averback, R.S., 2018. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 073605.
12. Messina, L., Schuler, T., Nastar, M., Marinica, M.-C., Olsson, P., 2020. Acta Mater. 191, 166.
13. Manning, J.R., 1971. Phys. Rev. B 4, 1111.
14. Senninger, O., Soisson, F., Martínez, E., et al ., 2016. Acta Mater. 103, 1.
15. Wolfer, W.G., 1983. J. Nucl. Mater. 114, 292.
16. Soisson, F., 2005. Philos. Mag. 85, 489.
17. Soisson, F., 2006. J. Nucl. Mater. 349, 235.
18. Rottler, J., Srolovitz, D.J., Car, R., 2007. Philos. Mag. 87, 3945.
19. Huang, C.-H., Marian, J., 2016. J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 28.
20. Martínez, E., Senninger, O., Caro, A., et al ., 2018. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 106101.
21. Anthony, T.R., 1969. Acta Metall. 17, 603.
22. Anthony, T.R., 1970. J. Appl. Phys. 41, 3969.
23. Anthony, T.R., 1970. Phys. Rev. B 2, 264.
24. Anthony, T.R., 1970. Acta Metall. 18, 307.
25. Anthony, T.R., Hanneman, R.E., 1968. Scripta Metall. 2, 611.
26. Kuczynski, G.C., Matsumura, G., Cullity, B.D., 1960. Acta Metall. 8, 209.
27. Aust, K.T., Hanneman, R.E., Niessen, P., Westbrook, J.H., 1968. Acta Metall. 16, 291.
28. Anthony, T.R., 1972. In: Corbett, J.W., Ianniello, L.C. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 1971 International Conference Held at Albany, New York, June 9 – 11, 1971.
29. Okamoto, P.R., Harkness, S.D., Laidler, J.J., 1973. Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc. 16, 70.
30. Okamoto, P.R., Wiedersich, H., 1974. J. Nucl. Mater. 53, 336.
31. Barbu, A., Ardell, A.J., 1975. Scripta Metall. 9, 1233.
32. Okamoto, P.R., Rehn, L.E., 1979. J. Nucl. Mater. 83, 2.
33. Marwick, A.D., 1978. J. Phys. F: Met. Phys. 8, 1849.
34. Smigelskas, A., Kirkendall, E., 1947. Trans. AIME 171, 130.
35. Rehn, L.E., Okamoto, P.R., Wiedersich, H., 1979. J. Nucl. Mater. 80, 172.
36. Rehn, L.E., Okamoto, P.R., 1983. In: Nol ﬁ, F.V. (Ed.), Phase Transformations During Irradiation. London: Applied Science.
37. Ardell, A.J., Bellon, P., 2016. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 20, 115.
38. Bakker, H., Bonzel, H.P., Bruff, C.M., Dayananda, M.A., 1990. Diffusion in Solid Metals and Alloys. Springer-Verlag.
39. Legrand, B., Tréglia, G., Ducastelle, F., 1990. Phys. Rev. B 41, 4422.
40. Busby, J.T., Was, G.S., Bruemmer, S.M., Edwards, D.J., Kenik, E.A., 1999. Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 540, 451.
41. Norris, D.I.R., Baker, C., Taylor, C., Titchmarsh, J.M., 1992. ASTM Special Technical Publication, pp. 603 – 620.
42. Watanabe, S., Sakaguchi, N., Hashimoto, N., Takahashi, H., 1995. J. Nucl. Mater. 224, 158.
43. Duh, T.S., Kai, J.J., Chen, F.R., 2000. J. Nucl. Mater. 283 – 287, 198.
44. Watanabe, S., Takamatsu, Y., Sakaguchi, N., Takahashi, H., 2000. J. Nucl. Mater. 283 – 287, 152.
45. Marwick, A.D., Piller, R.C., Sivell, P.M., 1979. J. Nucl. Mater. 83, 35.
46. Martin, G., Bellon, P., 1996. In: Ehrenreich, H., Spaepen, F. (Eds.), Solid State Physics. Academic Press, pp. 189 – 331.
47. Sizmann, R., 1978. J. Nucl. Mater. 69 – 70, 386.
48. Norgett, M.J., Robinson, M.T., Torrens, I.M., 1975. Nucl. Eng. Des. 33, 50.
49. Rehn, L.E., Okamoto, P.R., Averback, R.S., 1984. Phys. Rev. B 30, 3073.
50. Kato, T., Takahashi, H., Izumiya, M., 1992. J. Nucl. Mater. 189, 167.
51. Gan, J., Simonen, E.P., Bruemmer, S.M., et al ., 2004. J. Nucl. Mater. 325, 94.
52. Han, W., Demkowicz, M.J., Mara, N.A., et al ., 2013. Adv. Mater. 25, 6975.
53. Lee, E.H., Maziasz, P.J., Rowcliffe, A.F., 1980. Structure and Composition of Phases Occurring in Austenitic Stainless Steels in Thermal and Irradi ation Environments. Oak
Ridge National Lab.
54. Janghorban, K., Ardell, A.J., 1979. J. Nucl. Mater. 85 – 86, 719.
55. Potter, D.I., Ryding, D.G., 1977. J. Nucl. Mater. 71, 14.
56. Potter, D.I., Okamoto, P.R., Wiedersich, H., Wallace, J.R., McCormick, A.W., 1979. Acta Metall. 27, 1175.
57. Cauvin, R., Martin, G., 1979. J. Nucl. Mater. 83, 67.
58. Cauvin, R., Martin, G., 1981. Phys. Rev. B 23, 3322.
59. Was, G.S., Wharry, J.P., Frisbie, B., et al ., 2011. J. Nucl. Mater. 411, 41.
60. Nastar, M., Bellon, P., Martin, G., Ruste, J., 1998. Proceedings of the 1997 MRS Fall Meeting: Symposium B, Phase Transformations and Systems Driven F ar From
Equilibrium, pp. 383 – 388.
61. Yang, Y., Field, K.G., Allen, T.R., Busby, J.T., 2016. J. Nucl. Mater. 473, 35.
62. Sethi, V.K., Okamoto, P.R., 1980. Radiation-Induced Segregation in Complex Alloys. IL: Argonne National Lab.
63. Little, E.A., 2006. Mater. Sci. Technol. 22, 491.
64. Lu, Z., Faulkner, R.G., Sakaguchi, N., et al ., 2006. J. Nucl. Mater. 351, 155.
65. Lu, Z., Faulkner, R.G., Was, G., Wirth, B.D., 2008. Scripta Mater. 58, 878.
66. Wharry, J.P., Was, G.S., 2013. J. Nucl. Mater. 442, 7.
67. Marquis, E.A., Hu, R., Rousseau, T., 2011. J. Nucl. Mater. 413, 1.
68. Kuksenko, V., Pareige, C., Genevois, C., Pareige, P., 2013. J. Nucl. Mater. 434, 49.
262 Radiation-Induced Segregation

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
69. Field, K.G., Barnard, L.M., Parish, C.M., et al ., 2013. J. Nucl. Mater. 435, 172.
70. He, M.-R., Wang, S., Shi, S., et al ., 2017. Acta Mater. 126, 182.
71. Barr, C.M., Nathaniel, J.E., Unocic, K.A., et al ., 2018. Scripta Mater. 156, 80.
72. Kumar, N.A.P.K., Li, C., Leonard, K.J., Bei, H., Zinkle, S.J., 2016. Acta Mater. 113, 230.
73. Yang, T., Xia, S., Guo, W., et al ., 2018. Scripta Mater. 144, 31.
74. Lu, C., Yang, T., Jin, K., et al ., 2017. Acta Mater. 127, 98.
75. Brailsford, A.D., Bullough, R., 1981. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A: Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 302, 87.
76. Nichols, F.A., 1978. J. Nucl. Mater. 75, 32.
77. Glansdorff, P., Prigogine, I., 1971. Thermodynamic Theory of Structure, Stability and Fluctuations. New York: Wiley.
78. Onsager, L., 1931. Phys. Rev. 37, 405.
79. Cahn, J.W., Hilliard, J.E., 1958. J. Chem. Phys. 28, 258.
80. Wiedersich, H., Okamoto, P.R., Lam, N.Q., 1979. J. Nucl. Mater. 83, 98.
81. Howard, R.E., Lidiard, A.B., 1964. Rep. Prog. Phys. 27, 161.
82. Barbu, A., 1980. Acta Metall. 28, 499.
83. Perks, J.M., Murphy, S.M., 1987. Materials for Nuclear Reactor Core Applications. London: BNES.
84. Johnson, R.A., Lam, N.Q., 1976. Phys. Rev. B 13, 4364.
85. Faulkner, R.G., Song, S., Flewitt, P.E.J., Fisher, S.B., 1997. J. Mater. Sci. Lett. 16, 1191.
86. Lidiard, A.B., 1999. Philos. Mag. A 79, 1493.
87. Murphy, S.M., Perks, J.M., 1990. J. Nucl. Mater. 171, 360.
88. Barbu, A., Lidiard, A.B., 1996. Philos. Mag. A 74, 709.
89. Saunders, N., Miodownik, A.P., 1998. CALPHAD (CALculation of PHase Diagrams). A Comprehensive Guide. Oxford: Elsevier.
90. Franke, P., Seifert, H.J., 2011. Calphad 35, 148.
91. Philibert, J., 1991. Atom Movements: Diffusion and Mass Transport in Solids. Les Ulis, France: Editions de Physique.
92. Hanneman, R.E., Anthony, T.R., 1969. Acta Metall. 17, 1133.
93. Schuler, T., Barouh, C., Nastar, M., Fu, C.-C., 2015. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 015501.
94. Agarwala, P., 1992. Diffusion Processes in Nuclear Materials. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
95. Acker, D., Beyeler, M., Brebec, G., Bendazzoli, M., Gilbert, J., 1974. J. Nucl. Mater. 50, 281.
96. Dalla Torre, J., Fu, C.-C., Willaime, F., Barbu, A., Bocquet, J.-L., 2006. J. Nucl. Mater. 352, 42.
97. Henry, J., Barbu, A., Hardouin-Duparc, A., 2000. 19th International Symposium on Effects of Radiation on Materials, pp. 816 – 815.
98. Was, G.S., Wharry, J.P., Frisbie, B., et al ., 2011. J. Nucl. Mater. 411, 41.
99. Murphy, S.M., 1991. J. Nucl. Mater. 182, 73.
100. Bocquet, J.-L., 1987. Res Mech. 22, 1.
101. Hashimoto, T., Isobe, Y., Shigenaka, N., 1995. J. Nucl. Mater. 225, 108.
102. Shepelyev, O., Sekimura, N., Abe, H., 2004. J. Nucl. Mater. 329 – 333, 1204.
103. Bocquet, J.L., 1994. Phys. Rev. B 50, 16386.
104. Allen, T.R., Was, G.S., 1998. Acta Mater. 46, 3679.
105. Sakaguchi, N., Watanabe, S., Takahashi, H., 2005. J. Mater. Sci. 40, 889.
106. Sorokin, M.V., Ryazanov, A.I., 2006. J. Nucl. Mater. 357, 82.
107. Piochaud, J.B., Nastar, M., Soisson, F., Thuinet, L., Legris, A., 2016. Comput. Mater. Sci. 122, 249.
108. Vineyard, G.H., 1957. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 3, 121.
109. Garnier, T., Manga, V.R., Trinkle, D.R., Nastar, M., Bellon, P., 2013. Phys. Rev. B 88, 134108.
110. Garnier, T., Li, Z., Nastar, M., Bellon, P., Trinkle, D.R., 2014. Phys. Rev. B 90, 184301.
111. Messina, L., Nastar, M., Garnier, T., Domain, C., Olsson, P., 2014. Phys. Rev. B 90, 104203.
112. Fu, C.C., Willaime, F., 2008. Comptes Rendus Phys. 9, 335.
113. Tucker, J.D., Najafabadi, R., Allen, T.R., Morgan, D., 2010. J. Nucl. Mater. 405, 216.
114. Choudhury, S., Barnard, L., Tucker, J.D., et al ., 2011. J. Nucl. Mater. 411, 1.
115. Domain, C., Becquart, C.S., 2001. Phys. Rev. B 65, 024103.
116. Fu, C.-C., Willaime, F., Ordejón, P., 2004. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 175503.
117. Jónsson, H., Mills, G., Jacobsen, K.W., 1998. In: Berne, B.J., Cicotti, G., Coker, D.F. (Eds.), Classical and Quantum Dynamics in Condensed Phase Sim ulations. World
Scientiﬁc.
118. Ruch, L., Sain, D.R., Yeh, H.L., Girifalco, L.A., 1976. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 37, 649.
119. Senninger, O., Martínez, E., Soisson, F., Nastar, M., Bréchet, Y., 2014. Acta Mater. 73, 97.
120. Barnard, L., Morgan, D., 2014. J. Nucl. Mater. 449, 225.
121. Terentyev, D., Olsson, P., Klaver, T.P.C., Malerba, L., 2008. Comput. Mater. Sci. 43, 1183.
122. Pechenkin, V.A., Molodtsov, V.L., Ryabov, V.A., Terentyev, D., 2013. J. Nucl. Mater. 433, 372.
123. Bocquet, J.L., 2002. Defect Diffus. Forum 203-205, 81 – 112. doi:10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/DDF.203-205.81.
124. Finel, A., Turchi, P.E.A., Gonis, A., 2000. Phase Transformations and Evolution in Materials. Warrendale, PA: TMS, p. 371.
125. Castin, N., Malerba, L., 2010. J. Chem. Phys. 132, 074507.
126. Castin, N., Malerba, L., Bonny, G., Pascuet, M.I., Hou, M., 2009. Nucl. Inst. Methods Phys. Res. Sec. B: Beam Inter. Mater. Atoms 267, 3002.
127. Martin, G., Soisson, F., 2005. In: Yip, S. (Ed.), Handbook of Materials Modeling: Methods. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, pp. 2223 – 2248.
128. Becquart, C.S., Domain, C., 2010. Phys. Status Solidi (b) 247, 9.
129. Bouar, Y.L., Soisson, F., 2002. Phys. Rev. B 65, 094103.
130. Soisson, F., Martin, G., 2000. Phys. Rev. B 62, 203.
131. Soisson, F., Fu, C.C., 2007. Solid State Phenom 129, 31 – 39. doi:10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/SSP.129.31.
132. Clouet, E., Nastar, M., 2005. In: Turchi, P.E.A., Gonis, A., Rajan, K., Meike, A. (Eds.), Complex Inorganic Solids: Structural, Stability, and Magne tic Properties of Alloys.
Boston, MA: Springer, pp. 215 – 239.
133. Allnatt, A.R., Phys., J., Solid, C., 1982. State Phys. 15, 5605.
134. Barbe, V., Nastar, M., 2007. Phys. Rev. B 76, 054206.
135. Barbe, V., Nastar, M., 2007. Philos. Mag. 87, 1649.
136. Ghate, P.B., 1964. Phys. Rev. 133, A1167.
137. Doan, N.V., 1972. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 33, 2161.
138. Bocquet, J.-L., Limoge, Y., Brébec, G., 1996. In: Cahn, R.W., Haasen, P. (Eds.), Physical Metallurgy 4th Edition. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 535 – 668.
139. Trinkle, D.R., 2017. Philos. Mag. 97, 2514.
Radiation-Induced Segregation 263

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
140. Wu, H., Mayeshiba, T., Morgan, D., 2016. Sci. Data 3, 160054.
141. Garnier, T., Trinkle, D.R., Nastar, M., Bellon, P., 2014. Phys. Rev. B 89, 144202.
142. Schuler, T., Trinkle, D.R., Bellon, P., Averback, R., 2017. Phys. Rev. B 95, 174102.
143. Schuler, T., Nastar, M., Messina L., 2020. Phys. Rev. M 4, 020401(R). doi:10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.020401.
144. Schuler, T., Messina, L., Nastar, M., 2020. Comput. Mater. Sci. 172, 109191.
145. Schuler, T., Nastar, M., 2016. Phys. Rev. B 93, 224101.
146. Huang, L., Schuler, T., Nastar, M., 2019. Phys. Rev. B 100, 224103.
147. Moleko, L.K., Allnatt, A.R., Allnatt, E.L., 1989. Philos. Mag. A 59, 141.
148. Barbe, V., Nastar, M., 2006. Philos. Mag. 86, 1513.
149. Barker, H., 1979. Philos. Mag. A 40, 525.
150. Stolwijk, N.A., 1981. Phys. State Sol. (b) 105, 223.
151. Kikuchi, R., Sato, H., 1970. J. Chem. Phys. 53, 2702.
152. Kikuchi, R., Sato, H., 1972. J. Chem. Phys. 57, 4962.
153. Sato, H., Kikuchi, R., 1976. Acta Metall. 24, 797.
154. Nastar, M., 2005. Philos. Mag. 85, 3767.
155. Nastar, M., 2008. Comptes Rendus Phys. 9, 362.
156. Nastar, M., Barbe, V., 2007. Faraday Discuss. 134, 331.
157. Nastar, M., Clouet, E., 2004. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 6, 3611.
158. Barbe, V., Nastar, M., 2007. Phys. Rev. B 76, 054205.
159. Barbe, V., Nastar, M., 2006. Philos. Mag. 86, 3503.
160. Meslin, E., Fu, C.-C., Barbu, A., Gao, F., Willaime, F., 2007. Phys. Rev. B 75, 094303.
161. Soisson, F., Fu, C.C., 2008. Solid State Phenom. 139, 107 – 112. doi:10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/SSP.139.107.
162. Barashev, A.V., Arokiam, A.C., 2006. Philos. Mag. Lett. 86, 321.
163. Jönsson, B., 1992. Assessment of the Mobility of Carbon in C – Cr– Fe– Ni FCC Alloys.
164. Stepanov, I.A., Pechenkin, V.A., Konobeev, Y.V., 2004. J. Nucl. Mater. 329 – 333, 1214.
165. Benkaddour, A., Dimitrov, C., Dimitrov, O., 1994. J. Nucl. Mater. 217, 118.
166. Piochaud, J.B., Klaver, T.P.C., Adjanor, G., et al ., 2014. Phys. Rev. B 89, 024101.
167. Mansur, L.K., 1993. J. Nucl. Mater. 206, 306.
168. Jiao, Z., Michalicka, J., Was, G.S., 2018. J. Nucl. Mater. 501, 312.
169. Nastar, M., 2005. Philos. Mag. 85, 641.
170. Mansur, L.K., Yoo, M.H., 1978. J. Nucl. Mater. 74, 228.
171. Hackett, M.J., Najafabadi, R., Was, G.S., 2009. J. Nucl. Mater. 389, 279.
172. Sakaguchi, N., Watanabe, S., Takahashi, H., Faulkner, R.G., 2004. J. Nucl. Mater. 329 – 333, 1166.
173. Wharry, J.P., Was, G.S., 2014. Acta Mater. 65, 42.
174. Soisson, F., Fu, C.-C., 2007. Phys. Rev. B 76, 214102.
175. Bronchart, Q., Le Bouar, Y., Finel, A., 2008. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 015702.
176. Garnier, T., Nastar, M., 2013. Phys. Rev. B 88, 134207.
177. Nastar, M., Soisson, F., 2012. Phys. Rev. B 86, 220102.
178. Grandjean, Y., Bellon, P., Martin, G., 1994. Phys. Rev. B 50, 4228.
179. Vincent, E., Becquart, C.S., Domain, C., 2008. J. Nucl. Mater. 382, 154.
180. Soisson, F., Meslin, E., Tissot, O., 2018. J. Nucl. Mater. 508, 583.
181. Nastar, M., 2005. Philos. Mag. 85, 641.
182. Vincent, E., Becquart, C.S., Domain, C., 2007. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sec. B: Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms 255, 78.
183. Young, W.M., Elcock, E.W., 1966. Proc. Phys. Soc. 89, 735.
184. Bortz, A.B., Kalos, M.H., Lebowitz, J.L., 1975. J. Comput. Phys. 17, 10.
185. Krasnochtchekov, P., Averback, R.S., Bellon, P., 2007. Phys. Rev. B 75, 144107.
186. Krasnochtchekov, P., Averback, R.S., Bellon, P., 2007. JOM 59, 46.
187. Monasterio, P.R., Wirth, B.D., Odette, G.R., 2007. J. Nucl. Mater. 361, 127.
188. Wirth, B.D., Odette, G.R., 1999. Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 540, 637.
189. Dubey, S., El-Azab, A., 2015. Comput. Mater. Sci. 106, 111.
190. Nastar, M., 2014. Phys. Rev. B 90, 144101.
191. Badillo, A., Bellon, P., Averback, R.S., 2015. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 23, 035008.
192. Geslin, P.-A., Appolaire, B., Finel, A., 2014. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 011903.
193. Thuinet, L., Nastar, M., Martinez, E., et al ., 2018. Comput. Mater. Sci. 149, 324.
194. Thuinet, L., Rouchette, H., Legris, A., 2017. J. Nucl. Mater. 483, 62.
195. Manning, J.R., 1971. Phys. Rev. B 4, 1111.
264 Radiation-Induced Segregation