===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 118408 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Acta Materialia 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actamat 
Full length article 
Clarifying the mitigation effect of proton irradiation on the 
intergranular oxidation of 316L stainless steel in high temperature 
water 
Shengkai Wang a , Shihao Zhang a , Jiayu Xie a , Xingyu Feng a , Miao Song b , Gary S. Was c , 
Wenjun Kuang a , ∗
a Center for Advancing Materials Performance from the Nanoscale (CAMP-Nano), State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong 
University, Xi’an 710049, PR China. 
b School of Nuclear Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, PR China 
c Department of Nuclear Engineering and Radiological Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received 17 June 2022 
Revised 24 August 2022 
Accepted 29 September 2022 
Available online 1 October 2022 
Keywords: 
Stainless steel 
Radiation-induced segregation 
Intergranular oxidation 
Si-enriched oxide 
Scanning transmission electron microscopy 
a b s t r a c t 
The role of proton irradiation in the intergranular oxidation of 316L stainless steel after long-term immer- 
sion in simulated PWR primary water was clariﬁed by comparing the microstructural and microchemical 
features of oxide between the irradiated grain boundary (GB) and its un-irradiated counterpart. As such, 
the interference from difference in GB structure can be ruled out. Surprisingly, the results reveal that the 
intergranular oxide penetration in the irradiated region is shallower than that in the un-irradiated region. 
It is found that Si segregated at the irradiated GB diffuses outwards preferentially and gets oxidized due 
to its high diffusivity and aﬃnity to oxygen. The Si-enriched oxide in the intergranular oxide tip of ir- 
radiated GB can act as a temporary diffusion barrier for oxygen, although it tends to dissolve near the 
sample surface. Meanwhile, the eﬃciency of elements (especially Cr) transport along irradiated GB to the 
oxidation front is promoted mainly due to the vacancies created by preferential diffusion of Si, resulting 
in higher Cr content at the intergranular oxide tip. The combination of Si and Cr enrichments in the in- 
tergranular oxide tip can enhance the resistance to oxidation and eventually leads to a lower oxidation 
rate for the irradiated GB. For the ﬁrst time, our study determines that irradiation can enhance the in- 
tergranular oxidation resistance of stainless steel after long-term immersion in simulated PWR primary 
water when the sample is not stressed. 
©2 0 2 2 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
1. Introduction 
Austenitic stainless steels have been widely used as core in- 
ternals in light water reactors (LWRs) due to the high resistance 
to corrosion and excellent mechanical properties. However, the 
stainless steels were found to be susceptible to irradiation-assisted 
stress corrosion cracking (IASCC), which is a major failure mode 
for reactor internal components [ 1–5 ]. IASCC is an environmental 
degradation mode under the synergistic action of radiation dam- 
age, mechanical stress, and corrosive environment [ 1 , 5–7 ]. Under- 
standing IASCC is challenging as multiple factors are involved. Irra- 
diation accelerates stress corrosion cracking (SCC) as it aggravates 
the corrosiveness of the environment (e.g., water radiolysis), and 
changes the mechanical properties and corrosion resistance of a 
material by inducing displacement damage (e.g., dislocation loops, 
∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: wjkuang66@gmail.com (W. Kuang) . 
voids et al.) and elemental segregation (i.e., radiation-induced seg- 
regation (RIS) and precipitations). Radiolysis of water causes an in- 
crease in corrosion potential due to the formation of oxidizing ra- 
diolysis products such as H 2 O 2 [ 8 , 9 ]. The increase in corrosion po- 
tential leads to the dissolution of Cr-enriched inner oxides layer on 
stainless steel in high temperature water [ 10–12 ]. The defect clus- 
ters induced by irradiation result in localized heterogeneous defor- 
mation in the form of dislocation channels (DCs). The DCs cause 
stress accumulation at grain boundaries (GBs) and further result in 
a degradation of protective oxide ﬁlm [ 13–15 ]. However, the role 
of RIS in corrosion and SCC has not been well understood yet. It 
should be pointed out that although some works show that highly- 
irradiated stainless steel is susceptible to intergranular cracking 
under mechanical loading in an inert environment [ 6 , 16 ], corrosion 
is still an essential element for the occurrence of IASCC in most 
cases [ 17 , 18 ]. Actually, the formation of oxide ﬁlm has been well 
recognized as a crucial precursor in the process of SCC based on 
the internal oxidation and slip-dissolution/oxidation mechanisms 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2022.118408 
1359-6454/© 2022 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
[ 19–22 ]. More importantly, recent results suggest that intergran- 
ular oxidation is a crucial precursor for SCC initiation and prop- 
agation of the austenitic stainless steels [ 4 , 23 , 24 ] and nickel base 
alloys [ 25–27 ] in high temperature water. Therefore, intergranular 
oxidation of irradiated stainless steels in LWRs is a vital step in 
IASCC. Determining the role of RIS in intergranular oxidation be- 
havior would be critical in understanding IASCC. 
Currently, studies on the inﬂuences of radiation damage on the 
corrosion behavior of stainless steel are still very limited. In the 
case of the general corrosion behavior of irradiated stainless steel, 
researchers have not yet reached a consensus on the role of ra- 
diation damage [ 28–31 ]. As to intergranular oxidation, the most 
relevant radiation damage is RIS which refers to radiation-induced 
microchemical segregation on GB, such as depletion of Cr, Fe, Mo 
and enrichment of Si, Ni, P [ 32 , 33 ]. Deng et al. [28] studied the 
intergranular oxidation behavior of high angle grain boundaries 
(HAGBs) from the solution annealed (SA), 0.5 and 3 dpa proton- 
irradiated specimens in simulated pressurized water reactor (PWR) 
primary water environment with an exposure period of 500 h and 
found that the degree of oxidation increases with increasing radia- 
tion dose due to the enhanced RIS. Fukumura et al. [34] also found 
the GB oxidation depth of neutron-irradiated stainless steels, after 
service in a PWR water environment with an immersion time of 
1149 h, increased with increasing dose (3 dpa, 19 dpa and 73 dpa). 
Boisson et al. [29] performed an exposure experiment for 24 h on 
1.5 dpa proton-irradiated stainless steel in simulated PWR primary 
water and pointed out that the intergranular oxide penetration is 
deeper in the irradiated area (141 ± 2 nm) than in the unirradiated 
area (42 ± 2 nm). These studies appear to support that irradiation 
promotes intergranular oxidation due to the radiation-induced Cr 
depletion at GB. It seems reasonable that lower Cr content at GB 
would lead to lower corrosion resistance and thus higher suscepti- 
bility to SCC. However, the previous work suggests that Cr deple- 
tion at GB does not promote SCC in non-irradiated stainless steels 
in PWR primary water [32] . Other microchemical features induced 
by irradiation may also play a critical role in the resistance to inter- 
granular oxidation of irradiated stainless steel and should be paid 
more attention. More importantly, in the previous study of inter- 
granular oxidation behavior, the differences in GB structure that 
would result in different resistances to RIS [ 35 , 36 ] and intergranu- 
lar corrosion [37] have not been accounted for, making it impossi- 
ble to single out the effect of irradiation. 
This study aims to determine the effects of the radiation- 
induced microchemical changes at GB on the intergranular oxida- 
tion behavior of stainless steel after long-term immersion in sim- 
ulated PWR primary water. Proton irradiation, which can pene- 
trate deep enough for studying the intergranular oxidation behav- 
ior, will be used as an effective and economic surrogate to sim- 
ulate the reactor irradiation [38] . The proton-irradiated and non- 
irradiated regions of the same random high angle grain boundaries 
(RHABs) were sampled from the cross-section of irradiated surface 
for microstructure analysis after the exposure test. This enables di- 
rect comparative studies of the intergranular oxidation behavior 
between the irradiated and non-irradiated regions of a single GB. 
The interference due to the difference in GB structure can be elim- 
inated, which is necessary for singling out the effect of irradiation 
on intergranular oxidation. In addition, the intergranular oxidation 
depths were measured on the cross-sections of both irradiated and 
unirradiated regions to obtain results with statistical signiﬁcance. 
2. Experimental 
2.1. Material 
The material used in this study is a solution-annealed (SA) 
316L stainless steel with a chemical composition listed in Table 1 . 
Fig. 1. Damage proﬁle for 316L stainless steels irradiated with 2.0 MeV protons as 
calculated by SRIM 2013 computer code. A: Uniform damage region (UDR); B: Dam- 
age peak region (DPR); C: Non-irradiated region (NIR). 
Square bars with a dimension of 10 mm × 2 mm × 2 mm were 
machined by electrical discharge machining (EDM). The samples 
were mechanically ground with SiC papers up to 20 0 0 grit and 
electropolished for 20 s in a solution consisting of 10% perchloric 
acid and 90% alcohol at -40 °C. 
2.2. Proton irradiation 
The samples were irradiated using 2 MeV protons at a damage 
rate around 1 × 10 −5 dpa/s at 360 ± 10 °C with a 3 MeV Na- 
tional Electronics Corporation Pelletron accelerator at the Michigan 
Ion Beam Laboratory (MIBL) at University of Michigan. The SRIM 
2013 [39] calculation was adopted with quick Kinchin–Pease op- 
tion using a displacement energy of 40 eV, and the depth damage 
proﬁle is given in Fig. 1 . About half of the sample surface area was 
directly irradiated. The damage layer is about 20 μm thick with 
nearly 10 μm thick uniformly-damaged region (UDR) which has a 
damage dose of about 2.5 dpa. The proton irradiation procedures 
were described in more detail elsewhere [40] . 
2.3. Exposure test 
The cross-section of proton-irradiated 316L stainless steel bar 
was polished for exposure test. During polishing, the irradiated 
sample was mounted next to another stainless steel square bar to 
avoid deformation and rounded corners near the edge of cross- 
section. The sample was wet ground with SiC papers up to 30 0 0 
grit, polished with 1.5 μm, 0.5 μm diamond polishing pastes, 
and ﬁnally vibration-polished with 60 nm colloidal silica polish- 
ing suspension (3 h) to remove the deformed surface layer. Before 
the exposure, an FEI Helios Nanolab 600 system equipped with 
a Nordlys electron back scattering diffraction (EBSD) detector was 
used to characterize the GB network across the irradiated and non- 
irradiated regions on the cross section. The EBSD mapping was ob- 
tained at a step size of 2 μm with a voltage of 25 kV and a probe 
current of 5.5 nA. The exposure test was performed in a refreshed 
3.6 L autoclave made of 316 stainless steel at a ﬂow rate of 12 L/h 
in the laboratory of Xi’an Jiao tong University. The sample was ex- 
posed to 320 °C, 150 bar high-purity water containing 2.7 ppm H 2 
(30 cc H 2 /kg H 2 O) for 10 0 0 h. Conductivity and dissolved oxygen 
(DO) of both inlet and outlet water were continuously monitored 
with Mettler Toledo sensors during the test. 
2.4. Analysis of intergranular oxidation 
After the exposure test, the sample was removed from the auto- 
clave for further characterization. Only three straight RHABs span- 
2 

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Table 1 
Chemical composition of the 316L stainless steels. 
Element Cr Ni Mo Mn Si Co Ta S P Cu C Fe 
wt.% 16.20 10.11 2.06 1.58 0.35 0.17 0.017 0.001 0.036 0.37 0.017 Bal. 
Table 2 
Details about the appropriate three RHABs. 
GB 
GB Plane indices Euler angles: <ϕ1 , /Phi1, ϕ2 > in ( °) 
MA ∗ in ( °) Grain 1 Grain 2 Grain 1 Grain 2 
GB A GB A1 (-1 -3 1) ∼3.21 ° (0 4 -3) ∼1.05 ° (278.8;34.8;11.0) (45.9;24.4;53.2) 49.9 
GB A2 (-1 -3 1) ∼2.94 ° (0 4 -3) ∼1.22 °
GB B GB B1 (0 -8 5) ∼2.62 ° (-2 2 -1) ∼1.85 ° (214.0;51.1;43.4) (358.6;27.1;31.2) 34.9 
GB B2 (0 -8 5) ∼2.82 ° (-2 2 -1) ∼1.39 °
GB C GB C1 (-6 7 -5) ∼1.40 ° (1 6 -7) ∼3.07 ° (16.2;47.8;61.3) (49.1;38.7;80.6) 49.6 
GB C2 (-6 7 -5) ∼1.02 ° (1 6 -7) ∼2.97 °
∗ MA represents misoriention angle. 
Fig. 2. Schematic of GB A1 and GB A2 lamellae extraction on the cross section of the irradiated surface. 
ning both the irradiated and un-irradiated regions were used for 
this study and were named GB A , GB B and GB C , respectively. A 
novel approach was developed in our previous work to determine 
the GB plane index of a site-speciﬁc GB by measuring the Euler 
angles <ϕ 1 , /Phi1, ϕ 2 > and GB trace angles [41] . The details of these 
RHABs are summarized in Table 2 . Six site-speciﬁc transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM) lamellae ( ∼90 nm thick, polished with 
5 kV and 46 pA Ga + ions) were prepared in a FEI Helios Nanolab 
600 Dual Beam focused ion beam (FIB) according to a procedure 
used before [42] . For each GB, two TEM lamellae were extracted 
(one from the UDR and the other from non-irradiated region (NIR)) 
and were designated as GB X1 and GB X2 (X is A, B or C), respec- 
tively. Fig. 2 shows the schematic of GB A1 and GB A2 lamellae ex- 
traction on the cross section of the irradiated surface. The trace of 
sampled GB is fairly straight, indicating that the indexes of coupled 
GB planes should be nearly constant along the trace. Microstruc- 
ture analyses were conducted in a JEOL 2100F TEM under bright 
ﬁeld imaging mode along with selected area electron diffraction 
(SAED) at 200 kV. High-angle annular dark-ﬁeld (HAADF) images 
were obtained under scanning TEM (STEM) mode in a JEOL JEM- 
F200(HR) microscope. The oxide appears darker than the matrix 
in HAADF images due to its lower average atomic number. The 
STEM-HAADF images were used to measure the depth of inter- 
granular oxidation with the aid of Image J software. The depths 
of intergranular oxidation of GB A , GB B , and GB C were marked on 
the STEM-HAADF images, as shown in Fig. 3 . Moreover, elemen- 
tal distribution was studied using two 100 mm 2 energy dispersive 
spectroscopy (EDS) detectors equipped in the JEOL JEM-F200(HR). 
Before the STEM-EDS measurement, the GB was tilted to edge on 
position to minimize the broadening of the grain boundary. Both 
STEM-EDS mapping (image resolution: 512 × 512 pixel, dwell time: 
between 0.5 and 2 ms) and line scanning (step size: between 0.5 
and 1 nm, probe size: 5) were conducted to analyze the micro- 
chemical features of the intergranular oxide and grain boundary 
region. It should be noted that the counts of identiﬁed elements 
were used for EDS mapping. 
2.5. Measurement of intergranular oxidation depths from cross 
section 
To measure the intergranular oxidation depths from irradiated 
and unirradiated regions, the corrosion bar was cross sectioned. 
The oxidized bar was Ni plated to protect the oxide ﬁlms. Then 
they were mounted using conductive hot mounting, progressively 
ground using SiC papers, and then polished using diamond paste 
and polishing suspension to remove the deformation layer. The 
cross-section sample was examined across both the irradiated and 
unirradiated regions using a FEI Verios 460 in back-scattered elec- 
3 

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 3. Characterization of intergranular oxide penetration. (a–c) EBSD band contrast maps show the schematic of GB A , GB B and GB C lamellae extraction on the cross section 
of the irradiated surface, respectively. (d–f) STEM-HAADF images indicate the intergranular oxidation depths of GB A1 , GB B1 and GB C1 respectively, which were extricated from 
UDR. (g–i) STEM-HAADF images indicate the intergranular oxidation depths of GB A2 , GB B2 and GB C2 respectively, which were extracted from NIR. 
tron (BSE) mode. The beam voltage and probe current size were set 
to 5 kV and 0.4 nA. It is easy to identify the irradiated and non- 
irradiated regions as the damage peak region (DPR) can be readily 
identiﬁed in back-scattered electron (BSE) mode. A total of 50 GBs 
and 38 GBs were measured in the irradiated and unirradiated re- 
gions, respectively. The means and standard deviations of the mean 
were calculated to determine if the intergranular oxidation depths 
are statistically different between irradiated and unirradiated re- 
gions. 
3. Results 
Fig. 3 shows the traces of sampled GBs on the cross section of 
the irradiated surface and the STEM-HAADF images of the cross 
sections of GB A , GB B and GB C . The traces of these three RHABs on 
the orthogonal surfaces are fairly straight, indicating the GB struc- 
ture should be nearly constant along the traces. The sample sur- 
faces, which were speciﬁed as outer oxide layer/inner oxide layer 
interface, were marked on the STEM-HAADF images by straight 
yellow dashed lines. The depths of intergranular oxidation of GB A1 , 
GB B1 and GB C1 , which were extracted from UDR, were marked on 
Fig. 3 d–f, respectively. Meanwhile, the depths of intergranular ox- 
idation of GB A2 , GB B2 and GB C2 , which were extracted from NIR, 
were marked on Fig. 3 g–i. Quite unexpectedly, the intergranular 
oxide from UDR is consistently shallower than that from NIR for 
each GB. The GB plane indices of GB A , GB B and GB C were marked 
on the inverse pole ﬁgure (IPF) and the corresponding misorienta- 
tion angles were also denoted on the IPF ( Fig. 4 a). The depth of ox- 
idation penetration corresponds to the length of intergranular ox- 
ide. Thus, the oxide tip was deﬁned as the point where the oxygen 
signal decreases signiﬁcantly in the EDS mapping. The EDS map- 
ping of the enlarged intergranular oxide tip was used to conﬁrm 
the intergranular oxide tip. Fig. 4 b summarizes the depths of inter- 
granular oxidation of these three RHABs. The average intergranular 
oxide depth of the three GBs in UDR is 477 ± 45 nm while that in 
NIR is 599 ± 22 nm. In term of percentage, the difference in depths 
of intergranular oxidation between UDR and NIR ranges from 17% 
to 35%, which is consistently signiﬁcant. This conclusion would be 
compromised by the fact that there is variation in the oxidation 
depth along a single GB [43] . In order to estimate such variation, 
two TEM lamellae, which were several microns apart on one GB 
from irradiated region, were extracted. The results show that the 
intergranular oxidation depths of these two samples are almost 
identical (608 nm vs. 612 nm). It appears that the intergranular ox- 
idation depth is quite constant when the GB structure is ﬁxed. To 
be more statistically signiﬁcant, measurement of intergranular oxi- 
dation depths from cross section was conducted to further conﬁrm 
the difference in intergranular oxidation depth between UDR and 
NIR. The results of this measurement will be shown later. The mi- 
crochemical and microstructural characterizations of GB A , GB B and 
GB C were conducted and the results show very consistent features. 
Only the results from GB A were presented here. 
Fig. 5 shows the TEM bright ﬁeld images (under-focus mode) of 
GB A1 and GB A2 , respectively. The straight yellow dashed lines mark 
the sample surface, and the solid yellow arrows point to pristine 
GB A . Radiation-induced voids were observed in the matrix on both 
4 

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 4. (a) GB plane indices of GB A , GB B and GB C were marked on the inverse pole ﬁgure (IPF) and the corresponding misoriention angles were also denoted on the IPF. (b) 
Depths of intergranular oxide in UDR and NIR of GB A , GB B and GB C . (GB plane indices are represented by solid circle and each GB plane pairs belonging to the same GB are 
connected by solid lines). 
Fig. 5. Under-focused bright ﬁeld TEM images of the sampled (a) GB A1 and (b) GB A2 from UDR and NIR, respectively, (c) SAED pattern of intergranular oxide of GB A1 and 
matrix, (d) SAED pattern of intergranular oxide of GB A2 and matrix. 
sides of GB A1 (as marked in Fig. 5 a), while none was observed in 
the matrix surrounding GB A2 . Corresponding SAED patterns on the 
GBs were taken to verify that they have the same GB structure. 
As shown in the insets in Fig. 5 a and b, the SAED patterns taken 
from the circled areas show the same diffraction patterns. Consis- 
tently, the indices of coupled GB planes for GB A1 were calculated 
to be (-1 -3 1) ∼3.21 ° and (0 4 -3) ∼1.05 ° and those of GB A2 were (-1 - 
3 1) ∼2.94 ° and (0 4 -3) ∼1.22 °, as listed in Table 2 . The above results 
conﬁrm that GB A1 and GB A2 have almost the same GB structure. 
Fig. 5 c and d show the SAED patterns of intergranular oxide com- 
bined with matrix from the two samples. The SAED patterns reveal 
that the intergranular oxide has a spinel structure that is epitaxial 
with the matrix, and the structure of intergranular oxide was not 
changed by proton irradiation. Such intergranular oxide structure is 
similar to that of neutron-irradiated 316L stainless steel tested in 
simulated PWR primary environment [44] . It should be noted that 
porous interfaces within the intergranular oxide near the sample 
surface were observed along original GB both in UDR and NIR. 
Fig. 6 a and b show the STEM-HAADF images and EDS mappings 
of GB A1 and GB A2 . From the HAADF images shown in Fig. 6 a and b, 
the oxide ﬁlms consist of large outer oxide particles and an inner 
continuous oxide layer in both UDR and NIR. As shown in Fig. 6 , 
for both UDR and NIR, the intensities of Fe and Ni in the inner 
continuous oxide layer are lower than those in the matrix while 
Cr almost maintains similar intensity from matrix to inner oxide. 
As such, the relative content of Cr ([Cr]/([Fe] + [Cr] + [Ni])) in the in- 
ner continuous oxide layer in both UDR and NIR should be much 
larger than that in the matrix. Thus, the inner continuous oxide 
5 

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 6. STEM-HAADF images with EDS mappings of (a) GB A1 and (b) GB A2 from UDR and NIR, respectively. 
layer is enriched in Cr. Interestingly, the inner oxide on UDR is 
more uniform and thinner with a relatively even Ni-enriched tran- 
sition zone beneath the oxide, as compared to that on NIR. The in- 
tergranular oxides in both regions are clearly tapered. The depth of 
intergranular oxide along GB A1 is around 427 nm, while that along 
GB A2 is around 575 nm. A difference in the element composition of 
the intergranular oxide is noticeable between these two samples. 
The oxide along GB A1 is more enriched in Cr in spite of radiation- 
induced Cr depletion beyond the oxide. More interestingly, Si seg- 
regates at the intergranular oxide tip of GB A1 , and the degree of 
enrichment gradually vanishes when approaching the sample sur- 
face, suggesting that silicon in oxide near the sample surface was 
preferentially dissolved into high temperature water. Beyond the 
intergranular oxide, Si depletion is observed along a GB segment 
( ∼250 nm long) in GB A1, although Si was originally enriched due to 
RIS. Meanwhile, Ni is further enriched in addition to RIS while Fe is 
depleted. In contrast, GB A2 only shows Fe depletion and Ni enrich- 
ment beyond the oxide tip. Such chemical segregation results from 
oxidation and is termed as oxidation affected zone (OAZ) hereafter. 
It should be noted that the length of OAZ beyond the intergran- 
ular oxide along GB A1 is larger than that along GB A2 (250 nm vs. 
94 nm). Beyond the OAZ segment, element segregation due to irra- 
diation is clearly visible along GB A1, which is not observed at GB A2 . 
The pristine segment of GB A1 is enriched in Ni, Si while depleted 
in Cr and Mn from the EDS mapping ( Fig. 6 a). 
In fact, the irradiation effect on intergranular oxidation is not 
only reﬂected by the variation in oxidation depth, but also more 
fundamentally by the striking difference in features of intergran- 
ular oxide tip and OAZ. To further reveal the differences in mi- 
crochemistry between GB A1 and GB A2 , the intergranular oxide tips 
were analyzed with STEM-EDS at higher magniﬁcation, as shown 
in Figs. 7 and 8 . Some EDS line proﬁles were taken as indicated in 
Figs. 7 a and 8 a. The intergranular oxide tips of GB A1 and GB A2 are 
all enriched in Cr while depleted in Fe and Ni ( Figs. 7 a and 8 a). 
Most of the intergranular oxides of GB A1 and GB A2 are depleted 
in Mn except that in the oxide tips ( Figs. 7 b–d and 8b and c), in- 
dicating that Mn has mostly dissolved into water. Moreover, a re- 
markable Si enrichment was observed in the intergranular oxide 
tip of GB A1, while none was found in the intergranular oxide tip 
of GB A2 ( Figs. 7 a and d and 8a and c). As for the Cr content in 
the intergranular oxide, it is higher in GB A1 than in GB A2 (28.0 at.% 
vs. 20.2 at.%) ( Figs. 7 a and d and 8a and c). In addition, the com- 
position proﬁles of Cr across the intergranular oxide of GB A1 and 
GB A2 show an “M” shape and an inverted “V” shape ( Figs. 7 c and 
8 c), respectively. The results from GB B and GB C also show similar 
features. 
6 

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 7. (a) STEM-HAADF image and EDS mappings of the enlarged intergranular oxide tip of GB A1 (shown in Fig. 4 a with red dotted line) in UDR and (b–g) EDS line proﬁles 
along the lines in (a). 
The EDS line proﬁles across the intergranular oxide along GB A1 
are presented in Fig. 7 b–d. As shown in Fig. 7 b and d, the Si con- 
tent in the intergranular oxide tip of GB A1 decreases gradually from 
7.4 at.% ( Fig. 7 d) to 3.5 at.% ( Fig. 7 b) when approaching the sample 
surface. As mentioned above, intergranular oxidation causes addi- 
tional composition changes in GB just beyond the intergranular ox- 
ide. It results in further depletion of Fe, Cr and enrichment of Ni 
compared to RIS ( Fig. 7 e–g). The OAZ extends over 250 nm long 
and 15 nm wide beyond the oxide tip ( Fig. 7 a and e). More in- 
terestingly, the enrichment of Si due to RIS vanished in the OAZ 
( Fig. 7 a, e and f). The RIS of pristine GB in UDR is shown in Fig. 7 g. 
The GB is depleted in Fe, Cr and Mn and enriched in Ni, Si, and 
P. The degree of element segregation is deﬁned as the difference 
in content between GB and matrix. The magnitudes of Cr deple- 
tion and Si enrichment at the GB A1 are 5.7 at.% and 2.5 at.%, re- 
spectively. The magnitude of P enrichment at the GB A1 is 1.5 at.% 
( Fig. 7 g) and the P content signiﬁcantly decreases from the pris- 
tine GB to the oxide tip ( Fig.7e –g). P enrichment was not detected 
in the intergranular oxides of GB A1 ( Fig. 7 b–d), suggesting that P 
has directly dissolved into water. S was not counted here because 
7

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 8. (a) STEM-HAADF image and EDS mappings of the enlarged intergranular oxide tip of GB A2 (shown in Fig. 4 b with red dotted line) in NIR and (b–e) EDS line proﬁles 
along the lines in (a). 
its content is very low and the signal peak overlaps with that of 
Mo. 
The EDS line proﬁles across the intergranular oxide along GB A2 
are presented in Fig. 8 b and c. As shown in Fig. 8 c, the Si content 
in the intergranular oxide tip of GB A2 is 1.2 at.%, which is compa- 
rable to that in the matrix and doesn’t show much variation along 
the GB. It should be noted that the Si content in the intergranu- 
lar oxide tip of GB A1 is much higher than that for GB A2 (7.4 at.% 
vs. 1.2 at.%). The composition proﬁles of Si across the intergranular 
oxide of GB A1 show an inverted “V” shape ( Fig. 7 c). Considering the 
notable enrichment of Si at the intergranular oxide tip of GB A1 and 
the disappearance of Si enrichment just beyond the oxide tip, it is 
believed that Si can diffuse rapidly to the oxidation front along GB 
and gets oxidized. A similar phenomenon seems to apply to P at 
GB A1 except that P enrichment was not detected in the intergran- 
ular oxide ( Fig. 7 a-d). For GB A2 , intergranular oxidation also caused 
element segregation just beyond the intergranular oxide. It results 
in depletion of Fe, Cr, and enrichment of Ni. The OAZ is around 
94 nm long and 5 nm wide beyond the intergranular oxide ( Fig. 8 a 
and d). The chemical composition of pristine GB in NIR is signiﬁ- 
cantly different from that in UDR. Unexpectedly, Mo enrichment 
was observed at GB A2 (4.0 at.% in magnitude) ( Fig. 8 e), while none 
was detected at GB A1 ( Fig. 7 g). Mo enrichment occurred at the GBs 
of the as-received sample prior to proton irradiation ( Fig. 8 a). This 
phenomenon has also been found in our previous study [40] . The 
Mo content in the OAZ of GB A2 is comparable with that in the 
pristine segment (5.1 at.% vs. 5.3 at.%) ( Fig. 8 d and e), suggesting 
that there should be no migration of Mo element along GB dur- 
ing intergranular oxidation. However, Mo segregation was not ob- 
served at intergranular oxide of GB A2 except that at the oxide tip. 
It appears that Mo has dissolved into water near the sample sur- 
face. It should be noted that Mo enrichment was only observed 
at GB A2 and GB C2 while none was detected at GB B2 . According to 
the microchemical results, the intergranular oxidation of GB A , GB B 
and GB C have consistent features, indicating that Mo at GB does 
not change the intergranular oxidation behavior. This may be re- 
lated to the lowest oxidation tendency of Mo among Fe, Cr, Ni, Si, 
Mn, P, and Mo [45] . The magnitude of P enrichment at the GB A2 
is 0.8 at.% ( Fig. 8 e). Thus, radiation induces depletion of Mo and 
further enrichment of P from the original state. Unlike in irradi- 
ated GB A1 , the P content in the OAZ is barely changed compared 
to the pristine GB A2 ( Fig. 8 d and e). The P element in the inter- 
granular oxide of GB A2 has also dissolved into water ( Fig. 8 b and 
c). Fig. 9 a and b show the STEM-HAADF images and EDS mappings 
of the enlarged intergranular oxide tips of GB B1 and GB B2 , respec- 
tively. From the STEM-HAADF images of cross section, there are 
two much wider OAZs beyond the intergranular oxides. These two 
OAZs show the characteristics of diffusion-induced grain boundary 
migration (DIGM). The original grain boundaries are marked with 
dashed yellow lines and the migrated boundaries are represented 
by broken black lines. The EDS mappings conﬁrm that these two 
DIGM zones are enriched in Ni and depleted in Cr and Fe. A no- 
table Si enrichment was also observed at the intergranular oxide 
tip of GB B1 ( Fig. 9 a) along the migrated GB rather than the original 
GB. The sizes of DIGM zone in GB B1 ( Fig. 9 a) are much larger than 
that in GB B2 ( Fig. 9 b). The features of intergranular oxide, oxidation 
affected zone (OAZ), and pristine GB in UDR and NIR are summa- 
rized in Table 3 . In summary, these three pairs of GBs consistently 
8 

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 9. STEM-HAADF images and EDS mappings of the enlarged intergranular oxide tips of (a) GB B1 in UDR and (b) GB B2 in NIR. 
Table 3 
Features of intergranular oxide tip, oxidation affected zone (OAZ) and pristine GB in UDR and NIR. 
Features 
Intergranular 
oxide tip OAZ ∗ Pristine GB 
Similarities Enriched in Cr; 
Depleted in Fe 
and Ni; 
Depleted in Fe, 
Cr and Mn; 
Enriched in P 
Depleted in 
Mn and P 
Enriched in Ni 
Differences UDR Cr across the 
oxide show an 
“M” shape; 
Length and 
width in UDR 
are much 
larger than 
that in NIR 
Depleted in Fe, 
Cr and Mn; 
Si across the 
oxide show an 
inverted “V”
shape; 
Enriched in Ni 
and Si; 
More enriched 
in Cr 
More enriched 
in P 
NIR Cr across the 
oxide show an 
inverted “V”
shape; 
No Si 
enrichment 
Occasionally 
enriched in 
Mo; 
Occasionally 
enriched in Mo 
Slightly 
enriched in P 
∗ Oxidation affected zone (OAZ) beyond the intergranular oxide. 
show shallower intergranular oxidation depths in the irradiated re- 
gion than in the unirradiated one. 
The intergranular oxidation depths from the irradiated and 
unirradiated regions were measured from the BSE images obtained 
from the cross-section sample. Fig. 10 a shows some of the oxi- 
dized GBs from irradiated and unirradiated regions. Fig. 10 b shows 
the bar charts of measured intergranular oxidation depths from 
the irradiated and unirradiated regions. The average depths of in- 
tergranular oxidation in irradiated and unirradiated regions are 
428 ± 17 nm and 537 ± 19 nm, respectively. The difference in 
intergranular oxidation depth obtained from BSE images between 
UDR and NIR is 25%, which is quite consistent with that observed 
from the previous sampled GBs, conﬁrming that the resistance 
to intergranular oxidation after long-term immersion can be en- 
hanced by irradiation. 
4. Discussion 
Surprisingly, the results presented here indicate that proton ir- 
radiation retards the intergranular oxidation after long-term im- 
mersion, which is opposite to the conclusion achieved in previous 
relevant work [ 28 , 29 , 34 ]. Unlike in the previous work, the effect of 
irradiation on oxidation was determined from the direct compari- 
son between irradiated and un-irradiated regions of the same grain 
boundaries in this work. Thus, the inﬂuence due to the difference 
in GB structure can be eliminated. The inhibition effect of proton 
irradiation on intergranular oxidation will be discussed from the 
microchemical features of the formed oxide and the enhanced dif- 
fusivity of solute atoms along GB. 
4.1. Effect of irradiation on the microchemistry of intergranular oxide 
The STEM-HAADF images, EDS mappings, and line proﬁles 
shown in Figs. 3 and 6 –8 reveal differences in the microchem- 
istry of intergranular oxide of the same GB between UDR and 
NIR. A remarkable Si enrichment was observed at the intergran- 
ular oxide tip in UDR which was not detected in NIR. The oxide 
along GB in UDR is more enriched in Cr in spite of radiation- 
induced Cr depletion in pristine GB. According to the Ellingham- 
Richardson diagram, the aﬃnity to oxygen for the relevant ele- 
ment is as follows: Si > Mn > Cr > Fe > Ni [ 45 , 46 ]. In addition, Si has 
the largest diffusion coeﬃcient in austenitic alloys among these el- 
ements (D Si > D Cr > D Ni ) [ 47 , 48 ]. Therefore, Si segregated at the irra- 
diated GB can diffuse outwards preferentially and get oxidized at 
9

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 10. (a) BSE images of cross-sectioned specimen showing some of the oxidized GBs from irradiated and unirradiated regions, (b) bar charts of measured intergranular 
oxidation depths from the irradiated and unirradiated regions. 
the intergranular oxide tip [49] . The Si-enriched oxide can serve 
as a protective barrier layer in high temperature gaseous environ- 
ment, but tends to dissolve in high temperature water [ 33 , 49 , 50 ]. 
Therefore, with the increase of intergranular oxidation depth, the 
Si-enriched oxide near the sample surface gradually dissolved into 
high temperature water. A small amount of Si-enriched oxide re- 
mains at the intergranular oxide tip due to inadequate exposure to 
high temperature water. Finally, Si-enriched oxide about 206 nm 
long is formed at the intergranular oxide tip of GB A1 after 10 0 0 h 
immersion experiment (shown in Fig. 6 a) and the Si content de- 
creases signiﬁcantly when moving from the oxide tip to the sample 
surface (shown in Fig. 7 b–d). The undissolved Si-enriched oxide at 
the intergranular oxide tip can still act as a diffusion barrier and 
mitigate further intergranular oxidation in high temperature water. 
Meanwhile, as will be discussed in the next section, the transport 
of Cr element to the reaction front is enhanced by irradiation and 
Cr-enriched intergranular oxide forms. As a result, although GB A1 
is depleted in Cr due to RIS, the maximum Cr content in the in- 
tergranular oxide tip of GB A1 is much higher than that of GB A2 
(28.0 at.% vs. 20.2 at.%) ( Figs. 7 d and 8 c). Since the Si-enriched ox- 
ide formed preferentially along the original GB and the Cr-enriched 
oxides developed thereafter at both sides of the original GB, the 
composition proﬁles of Si and Cr across the intergranular oxide of 
GB A1 show an inverted “V” shape and an “M” shape ( Fig. 7 c), re- 
spectively. Given that these two types of oxides are complemen- 
tarily distributed in intergranular oxide (shown in Fig. 7 c), it is 
believed that both oxides should contribute to the improved re- 
sistance to intergranular oxidation. As the volume of Cr-rich oxide 
at the intergranular oxide tip is much larger than that of Si-rich 
oxide, the Cr-rich oxide may play a greater role in improving the 
resistance to oxidation of irradiated GB. In contrast, as there is no 
Si enrichment in the un-irradiated GB, the composition proﬁle of 
Cr across the intergranular oxide of GB A2 shows an inverted “V”
shape with no Si enrichment in the oxide ( Fig. 8 c). In summary, 
the elevated Cr content in combination with Si enrichment in the 
intergranular oxide tip can enhance the resistance to intergranular 
oxidation when the sample is not stressed and eventually leads to 
a lower oxidation rate for the irradiated GB. 
4.2. Effect of irradiation on solute diffusivity along grain boundary 
As discussed above, the mixture of Cr and Si enriched oxides at 
the intergranular oxide tip can act as a temporary protective bar- 
rier and result in a lower oxidation rate at irradiated GB A1 . The 
kinetic factor should also be taken into account to explain the sup- 
pressed intergranular oxidation along irradiated GB, i.e., enhanced 
solute diffusivity by irradiation. The enhanced solute diffusivity by 
irradiation can be veriﬁed by the fact that the size of OAZ (quanti- 
ﬁed by length and width) beyond the intergranular oxide is much 
larger in GB A1 than that in GB A2 , as shown in Figs. 7 a and 8 a. Due 
to the outward diffusion of Si and Cr beyond the intergranular ox- 
ide tip, the local composition is remarkably affected. Ni was further 
enriched while Cr was further depleted in addition to RIS beyond 
the intergranular oxide tip of GB A1 and the OAZ is around 250 nm 
long and 15 nm wide ( Fig. 7 a and e). In comparison, the OAZ ex- 
tends only about 94 nm long and 5 nm wide beyond the inter- 
granular oxide tip of GB A2 ( Fig. 8 a and d). It should be noted that 
the widths of OAZ beyond the intergranular oxide of GB B are much 
larger than those of GB A , and it is easier to identify the diffusion- 
induced grain boundary migration (DIGM) zone ( Fig. 9 ). Anyway, 
the sizes of OAZ in UDR are always larger than those in NIR for all 
the sampled GBs, as listed in Table 4 . Meanwhile, the maximum Cr 
10 

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Table 4 
Sizes of oxidation affected zone (OAZ), maximum Cr content in intergranular oxide and intergranular oxide penetration of GB A , 
GB B and GB C , respectively. 
GB OAZ ∗ (nm) Max. Cr 
content ∗∗(at. %) 
Intergranular oxide 
penetration(nm) 
Length Width 
GB A GB A1 250 15 28.0 427 
GB A2 94 5 20.0 575 
GB B GB B1 150 25 34.0 490 
GB B2 92 13 23.7 618 
GB C GB C1 169 18 30.2 515 
GB C2 0 0 21.5 604 
∗ Oxidation affected zone (OAZ) beyond the intergranular oxide. 
∗∗ The maximum Cr content in the intergranular oxide. 
content at the intergranular oxide tip of GB in UDR is much higher 
than that of GB in NIR. Therefore, the eﬃciency of element (espe- 
cially Cr) transport along GB has been promoted by irradiation. 
It should be noted that the only diffusion path for Cr to the ox- 
idation front is through GB which then migrates. The migration of 
GB is accompanied by the diffusion of Cr from the ﬁrst few mono- 
layers of one grain near the new migrated GB. Thus, the amount 
of diffused Cr can be measured by the size of the DIGM (or OAZ) 
zone. It should be noted that vacancy is the dominant carrier for 
diffusion because the concentration of interstitial is much lower 
than that of vacancy after the irradiation. As discussed above, Si 
segregated at the irradiated GB can diffuse outwards preferentially 
due to its high diffusivity and leaves behind many vacancies which 
can promote the diffusion of other solute atoms. The diffusivity of 
lattice atoms by vacancy mechanism is given by: D = f v D v C v , where 
D v is the vacancy diffusion coeﬃcient, C v is the vacancy concentra- 
tion and f v is the correlation coeﬃcient. Thus, increased vacancy 
concentration can increase the diffusion coeﬃcient of atoms. It is 
believed that the situation is similar for diffusion at GB as vacancy 
is also the major participant in the process of GB diffusion [51] . 
That is, vacancies produced by preferential diffusion of Si beyond 
the oxide tip at irradiated GB can enhance the diffusion of other 
slow-moving elements like Cr. This forms a concentration gradient 
of Cr between matrix (one grain near the migrated GB) and GB 
which further drives its diffusion to GB. That is why the intergran- 
ular oxide tip contains higher content of Cr in UDR than in NIR 
even when Cr is already depleted in UDR due to RIS. Diffusivity 
of P was also promoted in UDR as remarkable depletion of P oc- 
curred in the OAZ of irradiated GB while signiﬁcant P could still be 
detected in the OAZ of un-irradiated GB although P segregated at 
GB after irradiation (Figs.7 and 8). Similarly, it has been reported 
that a high entropy alloy (HEA) (28%Fe-27%Ni-27%Mn-18%Cr) can 
form a Cr-rich oxide ﬁlm over GB in 320 °C hydrogenated water 
[52] while austenitic stainless steel containing a similar amount of 
Cr is normally susceptible to intergranular oxidation. That is be- 
cause Cr diffusion along grain boundary in the HEA was promoted 
due to the fast diffusion of Mn. Irradiation induced defects may 
also affect elements diffusion along the grain boundary. It is be- 
lieved that vacancies or voids should have little effect on the dif- 
fusivity along grain boundary as there is a denuded zone adjacent 
to the grain boundary [ 53 , 54 ]. Nevertheless, dislocation loops were 
observed near the grain boundary which can facilitate the diffusion 
of elements like Cr. 
The enhanced diffusivity of Cr along irradiated GB helps to mit- 
igate the intergranular oxidation to some extent. Some previous 
works also suggest that the eﬃciency of Cr transport is vital to 
the resistance to corrosion. Zhou et al. [55] reported that in-situ 
proton irradiation enhances the diffusion of Cr and Ni from matrix 
to GBs and compensates the dissolution of Cr from GB to molten 
salt, which eventually decelerates the intergranular corrosion of 
Ni-Cr alloys. Similar effect was also found in general corrosion. 
Hanbury and Was [12] reported that in-situ proton irradiation pro- 
moted diffusion of Cr element and resulted in a decrease of inner 
oxide thickness of stainless steels in 320 °C hydrogenated water. 
Thus, the diffusivity of Cr is vital to the resistance to corrosion. 
Furthermore, the effect of Cr diffusivity on the protectiveness of 
oxide would be eventually linked to the SCC resistance. He et al. 
[56] found that the eﬃciency of Cr transport along GB is closely 
related to the site-speciﬁc susceptibility to SCC of a Fe-13Cr-15Ni 
alloy in simulated boiling water reactor normal water. Kuang et al. 
[ 25 , 57 ] demonstrated that the eﬃciency of Cr diffusion along GB in 
alloy 690 dictates the ability to form a compact chromia ﬁlm over 
the GB in high temperature hydrogenated water, and also the com- 
pactness of oxide beyond the crack tip. Therefore, the diffusivity of 
Cr is an important factor affecting the corrosion and SCC resistance 
of material. 
4.3. Relevance of intergranular oxidation to SCC 
It should be noted that the exposed sample was not stressed 
during the test. The current results indicate that the Si-enriched 
oxide formed at the intergranular oxide tip in UDR can serve as 
a temporary protective barrier and retard the inward diffusion 
of oxygen along the GB. It is quite unexpected since the previ- 
ous studies suggested that elevated bulk Si content promotes SCC 
growth rate in simulated PWR primary water [ 49 , 58 ]. Moreover, 
Kuang et al. [ 33 ] found that the decreasing SCC growth rate of 
neutron-irradiated 304L stainless steel in reducing high tempera- 
ture water was correlated with the reduced GB Si content which 
was achieved through annealing treatments. Such inconsistency 
should result from the stress condition. It has been reported that 
the adhesion of oxide decreases with addition of Si into the stain- 
less steel [ 59 , 60 ]. The brittle character of the silica formed on 
stainless steel is often considered as the primary cause of oxide 
scale spallation [ 59 , 60 ]. Similarly, it is believed that Si-enriched 
oxide formed at the intergranular oxide tip in UDR would de- 
grade the strength of GB and can be easily breached under stress. 
The Si-enriched oxide would dissolve in solution quickly once the 
crack initiates, hence accelerating the crack propagation. Indeed, 
the length and maximum Si content of Si-enriched oxide at inter- 
granular oxide tip in UDR in this work (206 nm, 7.4 at.%) are much 
larger than those beyond an IASCC crack from the same material 
which has been reported in our previous work ( ∼50 nm, 3.2 at.%) 
[40] . Thus, the SCC susceptibility depends not only on the degree 
of intergranular oxidation but also on the property of the formed 
oxide. 
Fig. 11 depicts the process of intergranular oxidation for the ir- 
radiated GB and its un-irradiated counterpart. For the irradiated 
GB ( Fig. 11 a), Si segregated at the GB can diffuse outwards pref- 
erentially and get oxidized at the intergranular oxide tip due to 
its high diffusivity and aﬃnity to oxygen. The fast diffusion of Si 
creates vacancies which enhance the diffusion of Cr to the oxida- 
11 

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
Fig. 11. Schematic of intergranular oxidation behavior for the (a) irradiated GB and 
its (b) un-irradiated counterpart. 
tion front. Hence, the oxide along irradiated GB is more enriched 
in Cr in spite of Cr depletion induced by RIS at pristine GB. The 
combination of Si and Cr enrichments in the intergranular oxide 
tip leads to a lower oxidation rate in irradiated GB than in un- 
irradiated GB ( Fig. 11 b). In addition, the OAZ formed beyond the 
intergranular oxide tip of irradiated GB is much larger than that 
of un-irradiated GB ( Fig. 11 a and b) due to the enhanced diffu- 
sion of solute atoms (especially Cr) along the irradiated GB. This 
work demonstrates that it is crucial to eliminate the interference 
from the difference in GB structure when studying the irradiation 
effect on intergranular oxidation. By doing so, the mitigation of in- 
tergranular oxidation by irradiation was determined here for the 
ﬁrst time. The mitigating effect of irradiation on intergranular oxi- 
dation is in contrast to the irradiation-assisted SCC, indicating that 
the property of formed oxide is also important to SCC resistance. 
Furthermore, the mitigation of intergranular oxidation by irradia- 
tion may be inﬂuenced by the irradiation dose and oxidation time 
which necessitates further detailed study. 
5. Conclusions 
The effect of proton irradiation on the intergranular oxidation 
of 316L stainless steel after exposure to simulated PWR primary 
water for 10 0 0 h was clariﬁed by ruling out the interference from 
the difference in GB structure. The following conclusions can be 
drawn in this study. 
(1) The intergranular oxide penetration in non-irradiated region 
(NIR) is deeper than that in uniformly-damaged region (UDR), 
indicating that proton irradiation has a mitigation effect on in- 
tergranular oxidation after long-term immersion. 
(2) Due to its high diffusivity and aﬃnity to oxygen, Si enriched 
in UDR due to radiation-induced segregation (RIS) diffuses out 
preferentially and promotes the formation of Si-enriched oxide 
at the intergranular oxide tip. The Si-enriched oxide at the in- 
tergranular oxide tip can act as a temporary diffusion barrier 
for oxygen although it tends to dissolve into high temperature 
water near the sample surface. 
(3) The eﬃciency of elements (especially Cr) transport along grain 
boundary to oxidation front is promoted in UDR mainly due to 
vacancies created by the preferential diffusion of Si, resulting 
in a larger oxidation affected zone (OAZ) beyond the intergran- 
ular oxide tip. Meanwhile, the maximum Cr content at the in- 
tergranular oxide tip in UDR is much higher than that in NIR. 
(4) The elevated Cr content in combination with Si enrichment in 
the intergranular oxide in UDR can enhance the resistance to 
intergranular oxidation when the sample is not stressed, even- 
tually leading to a lower intergranular oxidation rate in UDR 
compared in NIR. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan- 
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
inﬂuence the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51971172 ) and 
the Young Talent Support Plan of Xi’an Jiaotong University. The au- 
thors thank Dr. Jiao Li at Instrument Analysis Center of Xi’an Jiao- 
tong University for her assistance with STEM and EDS analysis. The 
authors also thank Prof. Genshu Zhou and Dr. Shaojun Wu at Xi’an 
Jiaotong University for their assistance in Ni plating, and research 
fellow Wei Wang for his assistance in SEM characterization. 
References 
[1] Z. Jiao, G.S. Was, Localized deformation and IASCC initiation in austenitic stain- 
less steels, J. Nucl. Mater. 382 (2008) 203–209 . 
[2] K.F.H. Nishioka, K. Fujii, T. Torimaru, IASCC initiation in highly irradiated stain- 
less steels under uniaxial constant load conditions, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 45 
(2008) 1072–1077 . 
[3] Y. Chen, B. Alexandreanu, W.K. Soppet, W.J. Shack, K. Natesan, A.S. Rao, Slow 
strain rate tensile tests of irradiated austenitic stainless steels in simulated 
PWR environment, in: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on En- 
vironmental Degradation of Materials in Nuclear Power Systems-Water Reac- 
tors, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA, 2011 . 
[4] D. Du, K. Sun, G.S. Was, IASCC of neutron irradiated 316 stainless steel to 125 
dpa, Mater. Charact. 173 (2021) 110897 . 
[5] K.J. Stephenson, G.S. Was, Crack initiation behavior of neutron irradiated model 
and commercial stainless steels in high temperature water, J. Nucl. Mater. 4 4 4 
(2014) 331–341 . 
[6] K. Fukuya, M. Nakano, K. Fujii, T. Torimaru, IASCC susceptibility and slow ten- 
sile properties of highly-irradiated 316 stainless steels, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 41 
(2004) 673–681 . 
[7] M.D. Mcmurtrey, G.S. Was, Role of slip behavior in the irradiation assisted 
stress corrosion cracking in austenitic steels, in: Proceedings of the 15th In- 
ternational Conference on Environmental Degradation of Materials in Nuclear 
Power Systems-Water Reactors, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA, 2011 . 
[8] G.P. Marsh, K.J. Taylor, G. Bryan, S.E. Worthington, The inﬂuence of radiation 
on the corrosion of stainless steel, Corros. Sci. 26 (1986) 971–982 . 
[9] B. Pastina, J.A. LaVerne, Hydrogen peroxide production in the radiolysis of wa- 
ter with heavy ions, J. Phys. Chem. A. 103 (1999) 1592–1597 . 
[10] S.S. Raiman, G.S. Was, Accelerated corrosion and oxide dissolution in 316L 
stainless steel irradiated in situ in high temperature water, J. Nucl. Mater. 493 
(2017) 207–218 . 
[11] S.S. Raiman, D.M. Bartels, G.S. Was, Radiolysis driven changes to oxide stability 
during irradiation-corrosion of 316L stainless steel in high temperature water, 
J. Nucl. Mater. 493 (2017) 40–52 . 
[12] R.D. Hanbury, G.S. Was, Oxide growth and dissolution on 316L stainless steel 
during irradiation in high temperature water, Corros. Sci. 157 (2019) 305–311 . 
[13] K. Stephenson, G.S. Was, The role of dislocation channeling in IASCC initiation 
of neutron irradiated stainless steel, J. Nucl. Mater. 481 (2016) 214–225 . 
12 

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
S. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Xie et al. Acta Materialia 241 (2022) 1 18408 
[14] G.S. Was, J.T. Busby, Role of irradiated microstructure and microchemistry in 
irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking, Philos. Mag. 85 (2005) 443–465 . 
[15] M.D. McMurtrey, B. Cui, I. Robertson, D. Farkas, G.S. Was, Mechanism of dislo- 
cation channel-induced irradiation assisted stress corrosion crack initiation in 
austenitic stainless steel, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 19 (2015) 305–314 . 
[16] H. Nishioka, K. Fukuya, K. Fujji, Y. Kitsunai, Deformation structure in highly 
irradiated stainless steels, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 45 (2008) 274–287 . 
[17] Z. Jiao, G.S. Was, Impact of localized deformation on IASCC in austenitic stain- 
less steels, J. Nucl. Mater. 408 (2011) 246–256 . 
[18] D. Du, K. Sun, G.S. Was, Crack initiation of neutron-irradiated 304L stainless 
steel in PWR primary water, Corros. Sci. 193 (2021) 109902 . 
[19] J. Panter, B. Viguier, J.M. Cloué, M. Foucault, P. Combrade, E. Andrieu, Inﬂuence 
of oxide ﬁlms on primary water stress corrosion cracking initiation of alloy 
600, J. Nucl. Mater. 348 (2006) 213–221 . 
[20] P.M. Scott, An overview of internal oxidation as a possible explanation of inter- 
granular stress corrosion cracking of alloy 600 in PWRS, in: Proceedings of the 
Ninth International Symposium on Environmental Degradation of Materials in 
Nuclear Power Systems-Water Reactors, Newport Beach, USA, 1999 . 
[21] P.L. Andresen, F.P. Ford, Life prediction by mechanistic modeling and system 
monitoring of environmental cracking of iron and nickel alloys in aqueous sys- 
tems, Mater. Sci. Eng. A 103 (1988) 167–184 . 
[22] P.L. Andresen, Fracture mechanics data and modeling of environmental crack- 
ing of nickel-base alloys in high-temperature water, Corrosion 47 (1991) 
917–938 . 
[23] M. Meisnar, A. Vilalta-Clemente, M. Moody, K. Arioka, S. Lozano-Perez, A 
mechanistic study of the temperature dependence of the stress corrosion crack 
growth rate in SUS316 stainless steels exposed to PWR primary water, Acta 
Mater. 114 (2016) 15–24 . 
[24] Y.Z. Huang, J.M. Titchmarsh, TEM investigation of intergranular stress corrosion 
cracking for 316 stainless steel in PWR environment, Acta Mater. 54 (2006) 
635–641 . 
[25] W. Kuang, M. Song, G.S. Was, Insights into the stress corrosion cracking of so- 
lution annealed alloy 690 in simulated pressurized water reactor primary wa- 
ter under dynamic straining, Acta Mater. 151 (2018) 321–333 . 
[26] W. Kuang, G.S. Was, A high-resolution characterization of the initiation of 
stress corrosion crack in Alloy 690 in simulated pressurized water reactor pri- 
mary water, Corros. Sci. 163 (2020) 108243 . 
[27] P.M. Scott, P. Combrade, General corrosion and stress corrosion cracking of 
Alloy 600 in light water reactor primary coolants, J. Nucl. Mater. 524 (2019) 
340–375 . 
[28] P. Deng, Q. Peng, E.H. Han, W. Ke, C. Sun, Z. Jiao, Effect of irradiation on cor- 
rosion of 304 nuclear grade stainless steel in simulated PWR primary water, 
Corros. Sci. 127 (2017) 91–100 . 
[29] M. Boisson, L. Legras, E. Andrieu, L. Laffont, Role of irradiation and irradiation 
defects on the oxidation ﬁrst stages of a 316L austenitic stainless steel, Corros. 
Sci 161 (2019) 108194 . 
[30] Z. Jiao, G. Was, Oxidation of a proton-irradiated 316 stainless steel in simulated 
BWR NWC environment, in: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference 
on Environmental Degradation of Materials in Nuclear Power Systems-Water 
Reactors, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA, 2011 . 
[31] S. Perrin, L. Marchetti, C. Duhamel, M. Sennour, F. Jomard, Inﬂuence of irradi- 
ation on the oxide ﬁlm formed on 316L stainless steel in PWR primary water, 
Oxid. Metal 80 (2013) 623–633 . 
[32] S.M. Bruemmer, E.P. Simonen, P.M. Scott, P.L. Andresen, G.S. Was, J.L. Nelson, 
Radiation-induced material changes and susceptibility to intergranular failure 
of light-water-reactor core internals, J. Nucl. Mater. 274 (1999) 299–314 . 
[33] W. Kuang, J. Hesterberg, G.S. Was, The effect of post-irradiation annealing on 
the stress corrosion crack growth rate of neutron-irradiated 304L stainless 
steel in boiling water reactor environment, Corros. Sci. 161 (2019) 108183 . 
[34] T. Fukumura, K. Fukuya, K. Fujii, T. Miura, Y. Kitsunai, Grain Boundary Oxida- 
tion of Neutron Irradiated Stainless Steels in Simulated PWR Water, in: Pro- 
ceedings of the 18th International Conference on Environmental Degradation 
of Materials in Nuclear Power Systems-Water Reactors, Portland, Oregon, USA, 
Marriott Portland Downtown Waterfront, 2017 . 
[35] C.M. Barr, G.A. Vetterick, K.A. Unocic, K. Hattar, X.M. Bai, M.L. Taheri, 
Anisotropic radiation-induced segregation in 316L austenitic stainless steel 
with grain boundary character, Acta Mater. 67 (2014) 145–155 . 
[36] S. Watanabe, Y. Takamatsu, N. Sakaguchi, H. Takahashi, Sink effect of grain 
boundary on radiation-induced segregation in austenitic stainless steel, J. Nucl. 
Mater. 283–287 (20 0 0) 152–156 . 
[37] Y.S. Lim, S.W. Kim, S.S. Hwang, H.P. Kim, C. Jang, Intergranular oxidation of 
Ni-based Alloy 600 in a simulated PWR primary water environment, Corros. 
Sci. 108 (2016) 125–133 . 
[38] G.S. Was, J.T. Busby, T. Allen, E.A. Kenik, A. Jensson, S.M. Bruemmer, J. Gan, 
A.D. Edwards, P.M. Scott, P.L. Andreson, Emulation of neutron irradiation effects 
with protons: validation of principle, J. Nucl. Mater. 30 0 (20 02) 198–216 . 
[39] R.E. Stoller, M.B. Toloczko, G.S. Was, A.G. Certain, S. Dwaraknath, F.A. Garner, 
On the use of SRIM for computing radiation damage exposure, Nucl. Instrum. 
Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 310 (2013) 75–80 . 
[40] W. Kuang, X. Feng, D. Du, M. Song, M. Wang, G.S. Was, A high-resolution char- 
acterization of irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking of proton-irradi- 
ated 316L stainless steel in simulated pressurized water reactor primary water, 
Corros. Sci. 199 (2022) 110187 . 
[41] X. Feng, J. Xie, W. Kuang, A novel approach to index site-speciﬁc grain bound- 
ary plane, Mater. Charact. 174 (2021) 110999 . 
[42] W. Kuang, G.S. Was, The effect of grain boundary structure on the intergran- 
ular degradation behavior of solution annealed alloy 690 in high temperature, 
hydrogenated water, Acta Mater. 182 (2020) 120–130 . 
[43] S. Lozano-Perez, K. Kruska, I. Iyengar, T. Terachi, T. Yamada, The role of cold 
work and applied stress on surface oxidation of 304 stainless steel, Corros. Sci. 
56 (2012) 78–85 . 
[44] L. Legras, B. Marylou, F. Elodie, C. Priscille, M. Remi, M. Salem, T. Jinane, 
R. Menand, TEM Investigations of the Microstructure and Oxides at the Tip 
of Intergranular Cracks of a Baﬄe Former Bolt Irradiated up to 10 dpa, 
FONTEVRAUD 9, Avignon, France, 2018 . 
[45] C.V. Robino, Representation of mixed reactive gases on free energy (Elling- 
harn-Richardson) diagrams, Metall. Mater. Trans. B 27 (1996) 65–69 . 
[46] Z. Zhang, E.H. Han, C. Xiang, Effect of helium ion irradiation on short-time 
corrosion behavior of two novel high-entropy alloys in simulated PWR primary 
water, Corros. Sci. 191 (2021) 109742 . 
[47] P.R. Okamoto, L.E. Rehn, Radiation-induced segregation in binary and ternary 
alloys, J. Nucl. Mater. 83 (1979) 2–23 . 
[48] J.T. Busby, G.S. Was, E.A. Kenik, Isolating the effect of radiation-induced seg- 
regation in irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking of austenitic stainless 
steels, J. Nucl. Mater. 302 (2002) 20–40 . 
[49] P.L. Andresen, M.M. Morra, Effects of Si on SCC of irradiated and unirradiated 
stainless steel and nickel alloys, in: Proceedings of the 12th International Con- 
ference on Environmental Degradation of Materials in Nuclear Power Systems: 
Water Reactors, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, 2005 . 
[50] R.O. Fournier, J.J. Rowe, The solubility of amorphous silica in water at high 
temperatures and high pressures, Am. Mineral. 62 (9–10) (1977) 1052–1056 . 
[51] A. Suzuki, Y. Mishin, Atomic mechanisms of grain boundary diffusion: Low ver- 
sus high temperatures, J. Mater. Sci. 40 (2005) 3155–3161 . 
[52] J. Dong, X. Feng, X. Hao, W. Kuang, The environmental degradation behavior 
of FeNiMnCr high entropy alloy in high temperature hydrogenated water, Scr. 
Mater. 204 (2021) 114127 . 
[53] B.N. Singh, S.J. Zinkle, Inﬂuence of irradiation parameters on damage accumu- 
lation in metals and alloys, J. Nucl. Mater. 217 (1994) 161–171 . 
[54] Y. Sekio, S. Yamashita, N. Sakaguchi, H. Takahashi, Void denuded zone forma- 
tion for Fe–15Cr–15Ni steel and PNC316 stainless steel under neutron and elec- 
tron irradiations, J. Nucl. Mater. 458 (2014) 355–360 . 
[55] W. Zhou, Y. Yang, G. Zheng, K.B. Woller, P.W. Stahle, A.M. Minor, M.P. Short, 
Proton irradiation-decelerated intergranular corrosion of Ni-Cr alloys in molten 
salt, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 3430 . 
[56] M.R. He, D.C. Johnson, G.S. Was, I.M. Robertson, The role of grain boundary mi- 
crochemistry in irradiation-assisted stress corrosion cracking of a Fe-13Cr-15Ni 
alloy, Acta Mater. 138 (2017) 61–71 . 
[57] W. Kuang, G.S. Was, The effect of grain boundary structure on the intergranu- 
lar degradation behavior of solution annealed Alloy 690 in high temperature, 
hydrogenated water, Acta Mater. 182 (2020) 120–130 . 
[58] G.F. Li, Y. Kaneshima, T. Shoji, Effects of impurities on environmentally assisted 
crack growth of solution-annealed austenitic steels in primary water at 325 °C, 
Corrosion 56 (20 0 0) 460–469 . 
[59] H.E. Evans, D.A. Hilton, R.A. Holm, S.J. Webster, Inﬂuence of silicon additions 
on the oxidation resistance of a stainless steel, Oxid. Metal 19 (1983) 1–18 . 
[60] G. Bamba, Y. Wouters, A. Galerie, F. Charlot, A. Dellali, Thermal oxidation ki- 
netics and oxide scale adhesion of Fe–15Cr alloys as a function of their silicon 
content, Acta Mater. 54 (2006) 3917–3922 . 
13 